I Am Not Sick
I Don’t Need Help!
How to Help
Someone with
Mental Illness
Accept
Treatment

10th Anniversary Edition

Xavier Amador, Ph.D.

Vida Press, New York
2012

I AM NOT SICK, I DON’T NEED HELP!
Xavier Amador
Copyright © 2010-2012 by Vida Press, L.L.C.
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America.
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission except in the case
of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews.
For information, address Vida Press L.L.C. 1150 Smith Road,
Peconic, New York 11958.
Also available in other translations and as an ebook. On the
web: www.VidaPress.com & www.LEAPInstitute.org
_____
Amador, Xavier, 1959 I AM NOT SICK, I DON’T NEED HELP!
How to Help Someone with Mental Illness Accept Treatment.
10th Anniversary Edition / Xavier Amador.

ISBN-13: 978-0-9677189-3-4

“LEAP®”; “L.E.A.P.®“;“Listen-Empathize-Agree-Partner®”;
“Listen, Empathize, Agree, Partner®” and all similarly
punctuated versions are registered trademarks of the LEAP
Institute, are protected under the laws of the United States
Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), and may not be used
without express license of the LEAP Institute.

for
Enrĩque and Lou-Andréa

Other books by Dr. Xavier Amador:
I’m Right, You’re Wrong, Now What?
Break the Impasse and Get What You Need
(Hyperion, 2008)
Break the Bipolar Cycle
(McGraw Hill, 2007)
I Am Not Sick, I Don’t Need Help! 2nd Edition
(Vida Press, 2007)
Insight and Psychosis, 2nd Edition
Awareness of Illness in Schizophrenia and Related Disorders
(Oxford University Press, 2004)
I am Not Sick, I Don’t Need Help!
(Vida Press, 2000)
Being Single in a Couples’ World
(Fireside Trade Edition, 1999)
Being Single in a Couples’ World
(Free Press, 1998)
When Someone You Love is Depressed:
How to Help Without Losing Yourself
(Fireside, trade edition, 1997)
When Someone You Love is Depressed:
How to Help Without Losing Yourself
(Free Press, 1996)
A portion of the proceeds from the sale of this book are donated to the
National Alliance on Mental Illness

To contact Dr. Amador and for information
on his books, LEAP trainings, and speaking schedule see
www.LEAPInstitute.org

Contents
Foreword by: Pete Earley
Preface to the 10th Anniversary Edition

ix
xiii

Introduction

1

Part I. The Truth about Denial of Illness
1. A Common Problem
2. Staying in the Game
3. The Root of the Problem:
New Research on Anosognosia

7

Part II. How to Help Using LEAP
4. The Right and Wrong Approach
5. Learning to LEAP
6. Listen
7. Empathize
8. Agree
9. Partner
Part III. Staying on Guard and Next Steps
10. Don’t Let Your Guard Down:
The problem of poor adherence
11. First Line Treatments
12. Involuntary Treatment
13. How to Do It
14. How to Survive an Involuntary Treatment
15. The Surprise

vii

9
21
32

53
54
64
70
113
123
134

145
146
148
157
170
185
195

viii ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

Part IV. Theory, Research & Practical Advice on LEAP
16. LEAP Theory and Research
17. Psychotherapy for Psychosis?
18. Violence and Mental Illness
19. DSM-V and Anosognosia
20. Henry

201

Acknowledgments
Literature Cited
Recommended Reading
Recommended Resources
Praise for the First Edition
LEAP Quick Start Guide
About the Author

229

202
209
215
219
224

231
236
239
243
250
253

Foreword

by Pete Earley (2nd Edition)
How would you feel, Dad, if someone you loved killed himself?
I was rushing my college age son, Mike, to an emergency room
when he asked me that question. He was seeing secret messages in
bumper stickers and experiencing rapid mood swings. When we
reached the hospital, I felt a tremendous sense of relief. The doctors there
would know what to do!
Four hours later, a doctor finally appeared and after briefly
questioning Mike, declared there was nothing he could do to help him.
Mike was convinced that he wasn’t sick and he refused to take antipsychotic medication.
Because the doctor did not believe Mike was an “imminent danger,”
either to himself or others, my son was turned away even though he
was clearly delusional.
During the next forty-eight hours, Mike decompensated. Only
another parent can really understand how agonizing it is to stand by
and watch your child slip further and further into a mental abyss.
I tried, of course, to intervene. I told Mike that his anti-psychotic
medicine would help him think more clearly. But he told me there
wasn’t anything wrong with the way he was thinking. I tried to
show him that he was having delusions, but he disagreed. Finally, I
begged him to take his pills. “Please, please, just do it for me!” But he
wouldn’t. “I’m not sick,” he kept repeating. After hours and hours
of exhausting conversations, I demanded that he take his medication
or leave the house. That threat only made the situation worse. Afraid
of what might happen to him on the street, I backed down. The next
morning, when Mike caught me spiking his breakfast cereal with his
medicine, he became enraged.
Forty-eight hours later, Mike was in police custody. He had slipped
outside one morning and broken into a house to take a bubble bath because he felt dirty. Luckily, the homeowners were out of town. It took
six officers to subdue him. Mike was charged with two felony crimes.
Uncertain what to do, I contacted the National Alliance on Mental
Illness (NAMI), the nation’s largest grassroots mental health organization, and a volunteer there urged me to read Dr. Xavier Amador’s
book, I Am Not Sick, I Don’t Need Help!
ix

x ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!
When I did, I was amazed. Just about everything that I had done
to help Mike had been wrong. Rather than calming the situation, my
actions had driven a wedge between Mike and me. I had not Listened
to him, not Empathized with him, certainly not Agreed with him and
finally had not formed a Partnership with him. Those are the four
guiding principles behind LEAP, an acronym that Dr. Amador has
coined to help teach parents and others how to better communicate
with their mentally ill loved ones. When I was arguing with Mike, I
had felt frustrated and overwhelmed. In Dr. Amador’s book, I found
a simple-to-understand blueprint for parents, siblings, children, and
friends to follow. While I was reading Dr. Amador’s book, I also
realized I was not alone. Others had faced the very same situation that
I had encountered with Mike.
I discovered that Dr. Amador’s advice came from years of experience as a clinical psychologist. His academic and professional credentials were impressive. He had served as a professor of psychiatry at
Columbia University, as Director of Research at NAMI, and Director of
Psychology at the New York State Psychiatric Institute. He had worked
as an NBC News consultant, appeared on countless television news
shows, been quoted regularly in the media, and had been called on by
the National Institute of Mental Health, Veteran’s Administration, and
U.S. Justice Department for advice. Dr. Amador also had served as an
expert witness in high-profile cases, including the Theodore Kaczynski
“Unabomber” trial, the Elizabeth Smart kidnapping, and the Zacarias
Moussaoui “Twentieth Hijacker” case.
But it was another tidbit from Dr. Amador’s background that
really caught my eye. His brother, Enrique, has schizophrenia. This
was important to me, because it meant Dr. Amador not only had
professional experience, but also a personal stake in his research. One
of the reasons why he had developed LEAP was to help him find ways
to better understand his own brother.
Eventually, my son was sentenced to two years of probation and
during that period, Mike followed the rules. He attended therapy,
participated in group sessions and took his medication. But several
months after Mike’s court-imposed sanctions ended, signs of his illness
began to resurface. I was stunned when I discovered that Mike had
stopped taking his medication. Despite everything that we had gone
through, he had, once again, quit taking his pills. My first impulse was
to confront him. How could you do this again? Haven’t you learned anything? But my wife reminded me of Dr. Amador’s book. Using LEAP,

I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP ▪ xi
she was able to work out an agreement that soon had him back on his
medication and into treatment.
In this new edition, Dr. Amador updates his groundbreaking book.
He explains how “unawareness” of a mental illness is a symptom
brought on by the disease. It is not a choice that an ill person makes. He
gives practical advice about how families and doctors can bridge the
gap created by the federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) that frequently prevents loved ones from being
informed and involved in treatment. He summarizes state commitment laws, using simple-to-understand terms to explain the legal complexities. Since releasing his first book, Dr. Amador has delivered more
than 300 lectures and conducted hundreds of LEAP workshops. He
has taken information from those sessions and added it to this edition.
These include model scripts that suggest specific phrases to use and
NOT to use. Being able to refer to these passages is much like having
Dr. Amador in your hip pocket.
The needs of every individual who has a mental illness are unique.
But regardless of that person’s specific problems, the basics that Dr.
Amador teaches help readers improve their communication skills, help
develop trust, and help turn combative situations into cooperative
ones.
One night while Dr. Amador was autographing books, a man approached him empty handed. He had left his dog-eared copy at home,
he explained, but had stood in line anyway because he wanted to
shake the hand of the doctor who had, as he put it, “given me my son
back.”
I feel the same way.
Pete Earley is the author of Crazy: A Father’s Search through America’s
Mental Health Madness. He is a former investigative journalist for the
Washington Post and the author of several New York Times best-selling
books.

Preface to the 10th Anniversary Edition
Xavier Amador (2012)

Why write a tenth anniversary edition? Was it because,
like many people, I like round numbers? I remember my tenth
birthday like it was yesterday. I was so proud to turn “10” and I
suppose I am proud or, more precisely, humbled that I Am Not
Sick has turned ten years old. This little book, which started out as
a labor of love, continues to grow in its reach to family members,
doctors, nurses, therapists, law enforcement officers and policymakers. To my surprise, it has been translated into French,
Spanish, Hungarian, Chinese and Japanese (more translations are
in the works). As much as I do see the appeal of round numbers,
their symmetry and the ease with which they can be memorized,
I did not revise this book simply because ten years have passed
since the publication of the first edition. I wrote it because ten
years of experience and new science have been acquired and
many more people are asking for even more information on the
nature of the problem of poor insight, anosognosia, treatment
options and how they can help someone with mental illness who
is convinced there is nothing wrong with them.
For owners of previous editions you might, at first glance,
think the book is merely one-third longer—there are seven
new chapters. But as you read, you will discover that previous
chapters have all been revised. My goal was to update the
research and to be even more practical and detailed in the advice
I give on how to engage someone with mental illness who does
not understand he or she is ill. You will learn several new LEAP
tools—I now call the specific communication techniques users of
LEAP employ “LEAP tools” (you will see why when you read
the first chapter on LEAP). In addition, in this new edition, I
report on recent research conducted on LEAP, opportunities
xiii

xiv ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

for training in LEAP and about new research that points to the
importance of ensuring persons with schizophrenia, related
disorders and bipolar disorder are involved in treatment and
adhering one hundred percent, or as close to that goal as possible,
to the medications prescribed. In this new edition, I also make the
case for why doctors should be assessing insight and diagnosing
anosognosia, or poor insight, whenever they assess a patient
with schizophrenia, schizoaffective, bipolar or related disorders.
Knowing whether the person believes he or she is ill is critical to
treatment planning.
It was nearly thirty years ago (in 1981) that I first learned
how my natural instinct to confront denial of illness head-on
led to disaster. My brother had just come home after his first
hospitalization for schizophrenia. The medicine he had been
given brought him back to the reality I knew, but within a day of
his getting home, I found the pills in the garbage can. Naturally, I
asked him why he’d thrown them out.
“I’m okay now. I don’t need it anymore,” he explained.
Since this ran counter to everything he was told in the
hospital, I made a point of reminding him. “But the doctor said
you’re probably going to have to take this medicine for the rest of
your life. You can’t stop taking it!”
“He didn’t say that.”
“Sure he did! I was at the family meeting, remember?” I
countered.
“No. He said I had to take it while I was in the hospital.”
“Then why did he give you a supply of medicine to take
home?” I argued, trying to prove him wrong.
“That was just in case I got sick again. I’m fine now.”
“No. That’s not what he said.”
“Yes, it is.”
“Why are you being so stubborn? You know I’m right!” I
said.

I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP ▪ xv

“It’s my business. Leave me alone.”
“When you got sick, it became everyone’s business. And
besides, I’m worried.”
“You don’t have to worry about me. I’m fine.”
“You’re fine now, but you won’t be if you don’t stay on the
medicine.”
“That’s not what the doctor said!”
“Then let’s call him and I’ll prove it!”
“I don’t want to talk about it! Just leave me alone,” he said as
he walked away.
With every dose of “reality” I tried to give him, Henry
countered with more denials. And with every go-round we both
became angrier and angrier.
I thought he was being stubborn and immature. My
accusations and threats to prove him wrong made him angry
and defensive. My natural instinct to confront his denial was
completely ineffective and made things worse. We got caught in
a cycle of more confrontation and denials (what I call the denial
dance), which pushed us farther apart. The end result was always
that he walked away angry. And then he would relapse and end
up back in the hospital.
In 1989, when I first started doing research on the problem of
denial, there were fewer than ten studies in the research literature.
When the first edition of this book was published, there were more
than one hundred. When the 2nd edition was published four years
ago, there were just over two hundred. Today, there are close to
three hundred! The avalanche of new research on the nature of
the problem and how we can best help persons who say “I’m not
sick, I don’t need help!” continues. We have learned a great deal
which I will tell you about in the pages ahead.
One final note. Over the last ten years, I have given several
hundred talks and workshops on the problem of denial and

xvi ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

the solutions offered in this book (i.e., LEAP). LEAP seminars
have been presented all over the United States, in many cities in
France, Belgium, Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom,
Hungary, Portugal, Turkey and Spain.
Because of the demand, my colleagues and I started a training
and research institute aptly named “LEAP Institute” (see www.
LEAPInstitute.org for information and free resources). We have
learned a lot about what works and what doesn’t. Over the past
decade, I have learned much from our experience with thousands
of patients, families and therapists all over the world, and from
the new research. These are the reasons, and not the number ten,
that I felt a new edition was needed. I am very excited about how
much more practical and informative this new book is and hope
that you will feel the same.
I end here with a quote from my foreword to the first edition:
“After my lecture [about the research on poor insight] I was
surrounded at the podium for nearly two hours, speaking with
family members who wanted advice and a greater understanding
of why their loved ones refused to accept help. The yearning
of these people to learn more and to talk to someone who
understood their frustration was enlightening. I was also struck
by the realization that the scientific advances with which I was
so familiar hadn’t yet reached many of the people who would
benefit most from what has been learned. That is why I wrote this
book.”
This realization, that many clinicians and family members
had not yet learned of the research related to this problem, is
nearly as true today as it was ten years ago. Tens of thousands
are now informed, but given the scope of the problem of poor
insight, millions more have not yet benefited from the science
you will read about the pages ahead. My hope is that this book
will finally close that gap between science and practice.

I Am Not Sick
I Don’t Need Help!

Introduction
If you are reading I Am Not Sick, I Don’t Need Help! it is
probably because you have a loved one or are treating a patient
with serious mental illness who is in “denial” and, most likely, is
not taking the medication he or she needs to prevent a flare-up of
the condition and to recover. Or, if he is taking it, he is not doing
so regularly. You’ve tried various strategies that haven’t worked
and you’re seeking information about how you can help him or
her to get help.
The first part of this book provides information about the
nature and scope of the problem you are about to tackle. Some
of you may be tempted to skip this section and go directly to the
chapters on LEAP (Part II of this book)—a communication strategy
designed to win the trust of persons with mental illness who lack
insight for the purpose of becoming a “friend” whose advice they
will follow (e.g., to accept treatment, supportive housing and
other services). I have no problem with that and encourage you
to do so if your situation is urgent. Or, if the situation is even more
urgent, you may want to turn directly to Part III, where I provide
practical guidance about when and how to secure “assisted
treatment” (inpatient or outpatient involuntary treatment). In my
mind, skipping ahead would be an appropriate use of this book.
If you do that, however, I strongly urge you—after things have
settled down—to go back and read the three chapters that make
up Part I.
The information in Part I is vital for several reasons. First, it
will help you to understand what the newest research has shown
about the causes of what may seem to you nothing more than pure
stubbornness on the part of the person you are trying to help. Too
often, people with these disorders feel that we (I am speaking both
as a therapist and as a family member) are their enemies. From
their perspective we are adversaries and detractors—definitely
1

2 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

not allies. Meanwhile, we scratch our heads and wonder why
they seem unable or unwilling to accept the help we offer. In this
context, it is not surprising that the relationship often becomes
adversarial. However, once you understand that the mentally
ill person’s refusal to accept treatment typically results from a
brain dysfunction that is beyond his control, you will see why
you shouldn’t take it personally or blame him for what appears
to be deliberate denial.
Countless times following lectures I have given to
professional and lay audiences (family members and consumers/
patients), someone will come up and tell me that knowledge of
the new research has helped to alleviate guilt. Just as often, I am
told that this information helps to diminish blame and anger
directed toward the mentally ill person who is refusing help. If
you are feeling angry and blaming the person you are trying to
help (both common and natural feelings), you will be much less
effective in what you are trying to accomplish, and your task
will be an unhappy adversarial endeavor rather than a positive
collaboration.
Just as importantly, however, you will learn why it’s so
important for you to keep trying. The research indicates that the
sooner someone receives medication, the better his prognosis,
the less frequently he will be hospitalized, and the shorter his
hospital stays will be. It’s often difficult to maintain your resolve
when you are dealing with someone who wants no part of what
you are offering, so knowing just how vital treatment is will help
you to persevere.
Once you know the nature of the problem and why you
so urgently need to address it, you will be better prepared to
understand and implement the new approach to dealing with
poor insight and treatment refusal described in the second part
of the book. The techniques you will learn—LEAP—are not only
informed by the research on insight and medication adherence

INTRODUCTION ▪ 3

you will already have read about, but are also based on the
results of recent placebo controlled studies and on my own clinical
experience working with patients and families and supervising
other therapists.
I can’t guarantee that LEAP will definitely eliminate
medication (and service) refusal in the person you’re trying to
help, but I can promise that if you faithfully follow the guidelines
I give, they will help lower tension, increase trust and greatly
increase the likelihood that the person you are trying to help
will follow your advice. And if my previous experience and the
published research are any indication, chances are very good that
you can make a very positive difference.
During the time you are working on the problem, you may
face the difficult dilemma of countless other family members
and therapists: whether or not to force medication by using
the psychiatric commitment laws in your state. Doing this can
sometimes be a vital part of the treatment process, but it is most
effective when it is done in a way that ultimately strengthens
your alliance with the mentally ill person rather than destroying
it. The third part of this book focuses on the question of when
to “commit or not commit” someone to hospital or outpatient
treatment1 against his or her will. You will learn not only the nuts
and bolts of how to seek commitment to the hospital, but also
how to cope with the difficult feelings this kind of intervention
raises for everyone involved. My main goal is to show you how
to deal with the accusations of betrayal you will likely encounter
and the guilt you may feel and, most importantly, how to use the
commitment itself to build trust and a sense of teamwork with
the very person you forced into treatment.
Too often, inpatient treatment is crisis-driven and, hence,
short-sighted. You can, however, build upon the trust and
1. Many states now have outpatient commitment laws. In select cases, these laws allow
family members and clinicians to seek a court order to medicate mentally ill persons
against their will without requiring hospitalization.

4 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

gains you have achieved after the person is discharged from the
hospital, and I’ll be providing you with strategies for doing just
that.
Finally, Part IV of the book ties it all together. You learn, in
a brief chapter, the theoretical and scientific basis of LEAP, about
other forms of psychotherapy that have been found to be effective
in lowering symptoms and how the research argues strongly for
a revision of how we diagnose schizophrenia, bipolar disorder
and related illnesses. In short, I argue that we must assess and
document whether the person has awareness of his or her illness
so we can design a treatment plan that makes sense (LEAP or
Motivational Interviewing rather than asking them to fill a
prescription they are certain they do not need).
In the last chapter, I tell you about Henry’s death. More
accurately, I tell you about his life and his relationships with his
girlfriend, friends, caseworker and his younger brother—me.
My intention is for you to draw inspiration and motivation from
this chapter as LEAP saved our relationship and gave us many
years of joy and hope. In this chapter, I hope to share with you
something about Henry’s remarkable selflessness.
The final section is a concise summary of all the major
interventions described in the book. It is quite literally a LEAP
“cheat-sheet” in that it will help you to easily remember the
essential tools to convince someone in “denial” to accept treatment
and services and, more importantly, to accept your friendship
and support.
Finally, I encourage all family members to investigate and
become involved with one of the family advocacy groups and
consumer organizations I list in the Resources section (e.g.,
NAMI). There are many reasons to do so, not the least of which
is to feel less alone and more supported in your quest to better
the life of your mentally ill relative. These organizations will also
help you to feel less ashamed and embarrassed about having a

INTRODUCTION ▪ 5

mentally ill person in your family. These feelings are unwarranted
and will only hinder you in your attempts to help your loved one.
For too many years I was ashamed about my brother, who
had schizophrenia. Despite knowing that he suffered from a
brain disorder and that I had nothing to feel ashamed about, I
avoided such organizations and kept his illness a secret from my
colleagues. It was only after talking with people like myself that I
was able to stop feeling ashamed. Because of my own experience, I
would certainly understand if you don’t feel that you are ready to
attend any kind of meeting or conference about mental illness. It
is ironic and sad that the instinct not to talk about family problems
keeps many of us from receiving the support and information we
need to solve those problems.
However, you can benefit from such organizations even if
you still feel hesitant about getting involved. You don’t have to
attend a single meeting to learn from their websites or request
other literature offered by these groups. I have learned much from
these organizations and have found great comfort in knowing
not only that there are many other families like mine but also
that there are forces at work to change mental health laws, fund
research, and improve treatments.
For therapists who read this book, I aim to give you hope that
you can reach your patients/clients with serious mental illness
who don’t think they’re ill and refuse your help. Whether you are
a mental health professional or a family member, this book will
help to dispel the despair that sometimes makes you want to turn
your head and look the other way. It will give you renewed hope
that you can make a big difference.

3
The Root of the Problem:

New Research on Anosognosia

(Ã-nõ’sog-nõ’sê-ã)

“This is not surprising, since the brain, the same organ we use to
think about ourselves and assess our needs, is the same organ that is
affected in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.”
E. Fuller Torrey, commenting on the high prevalence of poor
insight in persons with serious mental illness.
(Schizophrenia and Manic Depressive Disorder, 1996, page 27)

S

itting around the table with me were two nurses, a therapy
aid, a social worker and a psychiatrist. We were in the middle
of our weekly clinical team meeting discussing whether or not
we thought Matt was well enough to be discharged from the
hospital.
“His symptoms have vastly improved,” began Maria,
his primary nurse. “The hallucinations have responded to the
medication. He’s calmer and no longer paranoid.”
“Both his mother and father are ready to have him come
home again,” added Cynthia, Matt’s social worker, “and Dr.
Remmers has agreed to see him as an outpatient.”
“Sounds like we’ve got all our ducks lined up in a row.” Dr.
Preston, the team leader, capped the discussion and scribbled a
note in Matt’s medical chart.
“Only one thing troubles me,” Cynthia interjected hesitantly.
“I don’t think he’s going to follow through with the treatment
plan. He still doesn’t think there’s anything wrong with him.”
32

THE ROOT OF THE PROBLEM ▪ 33

“He’s taking his medication,” I observed.
“For now. But he’s really stubborn and so defensive. I don’t
think that will last more than a week or two after he hits the
sidewalk.”
I had to agree with Cynthia’s prediction, but I didn’t share
her view as to why he wouldn’t take his medication on the outside.
“What makes you say he’s defensive?” I couldn’t help asking.
Nearly everyone around the table burst out laughing,
thinking I was being facetious. “No, really, I’m serious,” I said.
The resident assigned to the case, Dr. Brian Greene, jumped
into the discussion.
“Well, he doesn’t think there’s anything wrong with him.
As far as Matt’s concerned, the only reason he’s here is because
his mother forced him into it. The man is full of pride and just
plain stubborn. Don’t get me wrong—I like him, but I don’t think
there’s anything else we can do for him as long as he’s in denial.
No one’s going to convince him that he’s sick. He’s just going to
have to learn the lesson the hard way. He’ll be back before he
knows what hit him.”
Dr. Preston, recognizing that Matt’s discharge was a forgone
conclusion, ended the discussion saying, “You’re probably right
about that and about the fact that there’s nothing more we can
offer him here. When he’s ready to stop denying his problems,
we can help. Until then, our hands are tied. Brian, you’re meeting
with Matt and his parents at three o’clock to go over the plan.
Any questions?” After a moment’s silence, Matt’s medical chart
was passed around the table for each of us to sign off on the
discharge plan.
“All I need to do is get a job. There’s nothing wrong with me.”
During the first few years of my brother’s illness (before I
went to graduate school to become a clinical psychologist), I

34 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

often thought he was being immature and stubborn. Asked about
what his plans were after being discharged from yet another
hospitalization, he ritually answered, “All I need to do is get a
job. There’s nothing wrong with me.” His other stock answer
was, “I am going to get married.” Both desires were natural
and understandable but unrealistic given his recent history,
the severity of the illness, and his refusal to accept treatment.
Someday, perhaps, he would realize his desires, but it was
very unlikely unless he was actively involved in the treatment
recommended by his doctors.
It was exasperating to talk to Henry about why he wasn’t
taking his medication—having limited experience with the illness,
the only reason that I could think of for his adamant refusal was
that he was being stubborn, defensive, and, to be frank, a pain in
the rear. I was lucky that I thought of my brother only as being
stubborn because, like many children of people with serious
mental illness, Anna-Lisa often wondered if her mother didn’t
love her enough to want to get better. It took her mother’s suicide
to educate Anna-Lisa about what was really happening. And, for
myself, it was only after I started working in the field, and met
many more people with serious mental illness, that I stopped
giving such theories much credence. It just never made sense to
me that the pervasive unawareness and odd explanations given
by people like Matt and my brother could be explained simply as
having an immature personality or a lack of love.
But you don’t have to take my word for it. Let’s look at the
research for a more objective answer to the question of what
causes poor insight and refusal to accept treatment.
Research on the Causes of Poor Insight
I have considered three possible causes of poor insight in
the seriously mentally ill. First, it could stem from defensiveness—
after all, it makes sense that someone who is seriously ill would

THE ROOT OF THE PROBLEM ▪ 35

be in denial about all the potential and promise for the future that
has been taken by the disease.
Or perhaps it’s simply the result of cultural or educational
differences between the mentally ill person and the people who are trying
to help him. Differences in subculture and values are often blamed.
For example, Anna-Lisa always believed that her mother’s
poor insight wasn’t denial so much as a preference for the
interesting and fantastic world her illness provided her—when
she was symptomatic, the world was a magical place filled with
adventures to be had and mysteries to explore. As a result, AnnaLisa never wanted to question her mother’s delusions, because
she feared that by talking about them, she might take them away
and somehow cause her mother even more pain.
The third possible cause is that poor insight into the illness
stems from the same brain dysfunction that is responsible for other
symptoms of the disorder. Historically, psychoanalytic theories
predominated to explain poor insight in schizophrenia. The
literature is rich with case studies suggesting that poor insight
stems from defensive denial, but the question had never been
tested in controlled studies until recently.
Everyday defensiveness is not responsible for the gross deficits
in insight that are so common in these patients.
Two of my doctoral students, Chrysoula Kasapis and
Elizabeth Nelson, took different approaches to this question
in their thesis research. Dr. Kasapis examined the overall level
of defensiveness in the patients she studied, while Dr. Nelson
looked at the issue of stigma.
Neither approach to the question found anything of
significance. Highly defensive patients were generally no more
likely to have poor insight than those with little or no defensiveness.
Similarly, how stigmatizing patients perceived their symptoms to

36 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

be had little effect on insight into their illnesses. Everyone gets
defensive from time to time and some are more prone to denial
than others—the same holds true for people with serious mental
illness. However, “everyday” defensiveness is not responsible for
the gross deficits in insight that are so common in these patients.
Cultural differences between the examiner and patient may
also play a role in the mislabeling of someone as having poor
insight. In other words, a patient may be well aware of most,
if not all, aspects of his mental illness, but his subculture might
label it something else. Consequently, he would not use the label
“mental illness” to describe himself. He might say instead, “I
have a nervous problem,” or, in the case of religious beliefs such
as those common to some Caribbean countries, “I am possessed
by evil spirits.” The subculture of the afflicted person needs to be
considered in any study of insight.
It’s ironic, but many patients with poor insight into their own
illnesses are excellent at diagnosing the same illness in others!
Related to the issue of cultural influences is the question of
patient education. Has the patient ever been told that he or she
has an illness? If so, has he or she been taught how to identify and
label symptoms of the disorder? In my experience, most patients
with poor insight have been told about the illness they have,
yet either claim they haven’t been told or adamantly disagree,
claiming that their knowledge is superior to that of the doctors
making the diagnosis. It’s ironic, but many patients with poor
insight into their own illnesses are excellent at diagnosing the
same illness in others!
The answer to the question of whether half of all people with
serious mental illness don’t know they are ill because they have
no information about the illness is actually obvious when you step
back for a moment. If you had heartburn that was bad enough

THE ROOT OF THE PROBLEM ▪ 37

for a friend or relative to convince you to see your family doctor,
who then diagnosed the problem as heart disease and explained
that the pain was angina, you would stop referring to the pain
as heartburn and start calling it angina. You would respond by
making an appointment with a cardiologist and canceling your
next visit with the gastroenterologist.
Why, then, do so many people with schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder fail to do this? Why do they persist in calling their pain
“heartburn” despite all evidence to the contrary?
A Concept of Self that is Stranded in Time
In our paper published in 1991, my colleagues and I proposed
that poor insight in people with serious mental disorders is
a consequence of, to coin a phrase, “a broken brain.” We came
to believe that pervasive lack of insight and the accompanying
illogical ideas offered to explain being hospitalized stemmed
from neurological deficits. At that time, we hadn’t yet considered
a neurological hypothesis to explain poor insight in bipolar
disorder, but we felt there was good reason to believe that what
we were seeing in patients with schizophrenia was a consequence
of brain dysfunction rather than stubbornness, defensiveness, or
ignorance about mental illness in general. The fact is that the brain
circuitry responsible for recording and updating self-concept is
not working properly in such patients.
For instance, my self-concept includes the following beliefs
about my abilities: I can hold down a job; if I went back to school, I
would be a competent student; I have the education and experience
to be a therapist; and I am generally socially appropriate when I
interact with others.
What are some of the beliefs you hold about yourself and your
abilities? Do you believe that you can hold down a job? What if I
told you that you were wrong, that you were incapable of working
and might never find employment unless you swallowed some

38 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

pills I had for you? And that you would have to take those pills
for a very long time, possibly for the rest of your life?
What would you say to that? Probably the same thing
my brother once said to me when I told him he would never
hold down a job again unless he took his medication faithfully:
“You’re out of your mind!”
You would likely think I was joking, and after I convinced
you that I was dead serious, you would come to believe I was
crazy. After all, you know you can work—it’s an obvious fact
to you. And, if I involved other people, including relatives and
doctors, you might start to feel persecuted and frightened.
That is exactly the experience of many with serious mental
illness whom I have interviewed. Their neuropsychological
deficits have left their concepts of self—their beliefs about what
they can and cannot do—literally stranded in time. They believe
they have all the same abilities and the same prospects they
enjoyed prior to the onset of their illnesses. That’s why we hear
such unrealistic plans for the future from our loved ones.
If a Man Can Mistake his Wife for a Hat...
If you have never talked to someone who has suffered a
stroke, brain tumor or head injury, what I have just said might
seem difficult to believe. If so, I recommend that you read The
Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat, written by the neurologist
Oliver Sacks (also the author of the book upon which the movie
“Awakenings” was based). Dr. Sacks has the gift of being able
to describe, in vivid detail, the inner life of people who have
suffered brain damage.
Writing about the case which gave title to his book, Dr. Sacks
described a man who had cancer in the visual parts of his brain
and noted that when he first met Dr. P., this music professor
couldn’t explain why he’d been referred to the clinic for an
evaluation. He appeared normal—there was nothing unusual

THE ROOT OF THE PROBLEM ▪ 39

about his speech—and he displayed high intelligence. As the
neurological evaluation proceeded, however, bizarre perceptions
emerged. When asked to put his shoes back on, he delayed—
gazing at his foot with intense but misplaced concentration.
When Dr. Sacks asked if he could help, Dr. P. declined the offer
and continued looking around. Finally, he grabbed his foot
and asked, “This is my shoe, no?” When shown where his shoe
actually was, he replied, “I thought that was my foot.”
There was nothing at all wrong with Dr. P.’s vision—it was the
way his brain was constructing and categorizing his perceptions
that was disturbed. Later, when he was sitting with his wife in Dr.
Sacks’s office, he thought it was time to leave and reached for his
hat. But instead of his hat, he grabbed his wife’s head and tried to
lift it off, to put it on. He had apparently mistaken his wife’s head
for a hat! When giving talks about poor insight in serious mental
disorders, I often like to say, “If brain damage can cause a man to
mistake his wife for a hat, it is easy to imagine how it can cause
someone to mistake his past self for his current self.”
In the late 1980s, I worked extensively with neurological
patients, administering psychological tests designed to uncover
the deficits caused by their brain damage. I couldn’t help noticing
the similarities between the neurological syndrome called
anosognosia (i.e., unawareness of deficits, symptoms, or signs of
illness) and poor insight in persons with serious mental illness.
Anosognosia bears a striking resemblance to the type of poor
insight we have been discussing. This resemblance includes both
symptomatic and neurological similarities.
For example, patients with anosognosia will frequently give
strange explanations, or what neurologists call confabulations, to
explain any observations that contradict their beliefs that they are
not ill. One 42-year-old man I evaluated had been in a car accident
and had suffered a serious head injury that damaged tissue in
the right frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes of his brain, leaving

40 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

him paralyzed on the left side of his body. When I met with him
about a week after the accident, I asked if he could raise his left
arm for me, and he answered “yes.” When I asked him to do it,
he lay there expressionless, unable to move his paralyzed arm. I
pointed out that he had not moved his arm. He disagreed. So I
asked him to do it again while looking at his arm. When he saw
that he could not move his arm, he became flustered. I asked him
why he did not move it, and he refused to answer at first. When
I pressed him, he said, “I know this is going to sound crazy, but
you must have tied it down or something.”
Anosognosia has been with us for as long as our species has
enjoyed the benefits of consciousness. More than 2,000 years ago,
L.A. Seneca, writing on the moral implications of self-beliefs,
described what appears to be a case of anosognosia following
hemianopia (blindness caused by brain damage): “Incredible as it
might appear...She does not know that she is blind. Therefore, again and
again, she asks her guardian to take her elsewhere. She claims that my
home is dark.” How could someone not realize she was blind? And
why, when faced with the evidence, would she seek to explain
away the blindness?
When one’s conception of who one is gets stranded in time,
one can’t help ignoring or explaining away
any evidence that contradicts it.
The man who had been paralyzed in the car accident could not
understand that he could no longer move the left side of his body.
It didn’t fit with what he believed about himself (that his arm and
leg worked fine), so he couldn’t help trying to explain away any
evidence to the contrary. He was just like the blind woman who
did not understand that she was blind, and more easily believed an
alternative explanation than the truth (e.g., the house was dark).
Every day, someone with a serious mental illness utters similar

THE ROOT OF THE PROBLEM ▪ 41

explanations to buttress his belief that there is nothing wrong
with him. When one’s conception of who one is gets stranded
in time, cut off from important new information, one can’t help
ignoring or explaining away any evidence that contradicts it. As
a result, many chronically mentally ill persons attribute their
hospitalizations to fights with parents, misunderstandings, etc.
Like neurological patients with anosognosia, they appear rigid
in their unawareness, unable to integrate new information that is
contrary to their erroneous beliefs.
One final similarity between neurological patients with
anosognosia and the seriously mentally ill involves the patch-like
pattern of poor insight. Pockets of unawareness and awareness
often coexist side by side. For example, the anosognosia patient
may be aware of a memory deficit but unaware of paralysis.
Similarly, we have seen many patients with schizophrenia who
are aware of particular symptoms while remaining completely
unaware of others.
Damage to particular brain areas can result in anosognosia.
Studies of anosognosia, therefore, provide a practical starting
point for hypothesizing about the brain structures responsible for
insight in persons with serious mental disorders. Neurological
patients with anosognosia are frequently found to have lesions
(i.e., damage of one kind or another) to the frontal lobes of their
brains. Interestingly, research has shown that these same areas of
the brain are often dysfunctional in people with serious mental
illness.
In one study of neurological patients at Hillside Hospital in
Queens, New York, conducted in collaboration with Dr. William
Barr and Dr. Alexandra Economou, I compared patterns of
unawareness in three groups of patients suffering damage to
three different regions of the brain. This study was funded by the
Stanley Foundation and had as one of its goals identifying the
brain dysfunction most likely to produce awareness deficits. As

42 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

expected, patients with frontal lesions were more likely to show
problems with insight into their illnesses than patients with left
posterior damage. Let’s look at an example.
George, a 71-year-old man who had suffered a stroke, was
asked to draw the clock on the left side of the figure that appears
below. Before drawing the clock, he was asked, “Do you think
you will have any difficulty copying of this picture?”
George was instructed to use the following 4-point scale to
answer the question: 0 = no difficulty, 1 = some difficulty, 2 =
much difficulty, and 3 = cannot do. He answered “0” and said he
would have no difficulty. The right side of the figure shows the
drawing he made after exerting great effort.

More striking than his inability to recognize that the stroke
had left him unable to perform such a simple task was what
happened next. When asked if he’d had any difficulty drawing
the clock, he answered, “No, not at all.” Further questioning
revealed that he could not see or comprehend the differences
between his clock and ours.
When it was pointed out to him that his numbers drifted
past the circle, he became flustered and said, “Wait, that can’t be
my drawing. What happened to the one I drew? You switched
it on me!” This is an example of a confabulation. Confabulations
are the product of a brain “reflex” that fills in gaps in our

THE ROOT OF THE PROBLEM ▪ 43

understanding and memory of the world around us. Almost
everyone confabulates a little—you’ve heard people stop in the
middle of recounting something that happened to them and say
something like, “Wait, I was lying. I don’t know why I said that. It
didn’t happen that way!” This is an example of an instance when
someone realizes he has confabulated and corrects himself.
Confabulations are “constructed” memories and/or
experiences that are especially common in people with brain
dysfunction. However, in such individuals, we don’t usually
observe self-correction, because they don’t understand the need
for correction. George wasn’t lying when he said I had switched
the drawing on him. It was the only thing that made any sense to
him, so for a moment, he believed that was what had happened.
He was operating under beliefs that were linked
to his past self rather than his current self.
In his book The Principles of Psychology, William James wrote:
“Whilst part of what we perceive comes through our senses from the
object before us, another part (and it may be the larger part) always
comes from our own mind.”
There are few better examples of James’s insight than the
one I have just given you. George “saw” his drawing using his
sense of vision. But his perception of the clock—the image of
the drawing that was processed in his brain—was something
altogether different from what his eyes saw. George had a
concept of himself, a self-schema, that included the belief that
he could easily copy a simple drawing of a clock. You have the
same belief as part of your self-schema. You might not consider
yourself artistically endowed, but you believe that you could
produce a reasonable facsimile of the drawing if asked to. In a
sense, this belief was stranded in George’s brain, disconnected
from his visual senses and left unmodified by the stroke he had

44 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

suffered. He was operating under beliefs that were linked to his
past self rather than his current self. He saw the numbers drifting
outside his lopsided circle, but he perceived the numbers to be in
their proper place inside a symmetrical circle. Our brains are built
to order, and even help construct, our perceptions.
Here is a simple example of what I am talking
about. Answer this question: What letter appears
in the box you see to the right?
If you answered “E” you saw what the majority of people
who are given this task see. But in reality, you did not see the letter
E. What you saw is a line with two right angles (a box-like version
of the letter “C”) and a short line that is unconnected to the longer
one. You likely answered “E” because you perceived the letter E.
The visual processing and memory circuits of your brain “closed
the gap” between the lines so you could answer the question.
To prove that poor insight in serious mental disorders is
neurologically based, however, my colleagues and I needed more
than observed similarities with neurological patients. We needed
testable hypotheses and data that were confirmatory. Knowing that
patients with schizophrenia frequently show poor performance on
neuropsychological tests of frontal lobe function, we hypothesized
that there should be a strong correlation between various aspects
of unawareness of illness and performance on those tests.
Dr. Donald Young and his colleagues in Toronto, Canada,
quickly tested and confirmed our hypothesis. They studied
patients with schizophrenia to examine whether performance
on neuropsychological tests of frontal lobe function predicted
the level of insight into illness, and the result showed a strong
association between the two. Of particular note is the fact that
this correlation was independent of other cognitive functions
they tested, including overall IQ. In other words, poor insight

THE ROOT OF THE PROBLEM ▪ 45

was related to dysfunction of the frontal lobes of the brain rather
than to a more generalized problem with intellectual functioning.
Taken together, these results strongly support the idea that poor
insight into illness and resulting treatment refusal stem from a
mental defect rather than informed choice.
But just as one swallow does not make a summer, one
research finding does not make an indisputable fact. The next
step in determining more definitively whether poor insight into
illness is a consequence of frontal lobe dysfunction is to replicate
the findings of Young and his colleagues in a new group of
patients.
As it turns out, the finding that poorer insight is highly
correlated with frontal lobe dysfunction has been replicated
many times by various research groups (see table below). The
list of replications I give here will undoubtedly be added to by
the time you read these words, as I am aware of yet unpublished
results that also confirm the hypothesis.
Repeated replications by independent researchers are
infrequent in psychiatric research, so the fact that various
researchers have found essentially the same thing as Young and
his colleagues speaks to the strength of the relationship between
insight and the frontal lobes of the brain. A few studies have not
found this relationship, but in those cases methodological flaws
in the design of the research are likely the reason.
Executive (frontal) dysfunction and poor insight
•Young et al. Schizophrenia Research, 1993
•Lysaker et al. Psychiatry, 1994
•Kasapis et al. Schizophrenia Research, 1996
•McEvoy et al. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 1996
•Voruganti et al. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 1997
•Lysaker et al. Acta Psychiatr Scand, 1998

46 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

•Young et al. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 1998
•Bell et al. Chapter in: Insight & Psychosis, Amador & David,
Eds. 1998
•Morgan et al. Schizophrenia Research, 1999a & 1999b
•Smith et al. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 1999
•Smith et al. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 2000
•Laroi et al. Psychiatry Research, 2000
•Bucklet et al. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 2001
•Lysaker et al. Schizophrenia Research, 2003
•Drake et al. Schizophrenia Research, 2003
•Morgan and David (review) in Insight and Psychosis,
2nd Edition (Oxford University Press, 2004)

There is also an emerging body of literature linking poor
insight in schizophrenia and other psychotic illnesses to functional
and structural abnormalities in the brain, usually involving the
frontal lobes. A review of these brain-imaging studies (e.g., using
MRI, CT and PET scans) can be found in Insight and Psychosis,
Amador XF and David AS (Editors), Oxford University Press,
2005.
The research discussed above, and other newer studies
that link poor insight to structural brain abnormalities, lead us
to only one conclusion. In most patients with schizophrenia and
related psychotic disorders, deficits in insight and resulting nonadherence to treatment stem from a broken brain rather than
stubbornness or denial.
If you are dealing with a mental health professional who
is holding on to the outdated idea that severe and persistent
problems with insight are a consequence of “denial” (i.e., a coping
mechanism), ask him or her to look at the “Schizophrenia and
Related Disorders” section of the DSM-IV-TR, page 304:

THE ROOT OF THE PROBLEM ▪ 47

Associated Features and Disorders
“A majority of individuals with Schizophrenia have poor
insight regarding the fact that they have a psychotic illness.
Evidence suggests that poor insight is a manifestation of the
illness itself rather than a coping strategy… comparable to the
lack of awareness of neurological deficits seen in stroke, termed
anosognosia.”
Now, if the person you are trying to educate is extremely
resistant and also a careful reader, he or she may say something
like, “Yes, but I also see that Dr. Amador was the co-chair of this
section of the DSM, so he just wrote what he already believes. It
doesn’t prove anything!” If that happens, have the person read the
introduction to the last revision. He will learn that every sentence
in this version of the DSM had to be peer-reviewed before it was
added. Peer review in this context involved other experts in the
field receiving the proposed text along with all the research articles
that supported the changes my co-chair and I wanted to make.
All changes had to be supported by reliable and valid research findings.
So, although the field has been slow to give up outdated theories
about poor insight in these disorders (thinking it’s denial rather
than anosognosia), we are making progress.
New Research on Anosognosia
I have been invited to guest-edit a special edition of the
National Institute of Mental Health’s journal Schizophrenia Bulletin
focused on “Poor Insight in Schizophrenia.” This special issue
is slated to appear in late 2011. I thought it would be helpful to
readers of this book to provide a brief summary of some of the
most recent research implicating brain dysfunction as the root
cause of unawareness of illness. Below is a brief table listing some
of those studies.

48 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

Authors

Year

Journal

Results

1998

The journal of nervous
and mental disease,
186(1), 44-50.

Lack of illness awareness is related
to defective frontal lobe functioning
as indexed by neuropsychological
measures.

2000

Psychiatry Research,
2000 Nov 20;
100(1):49-58

Deficits in the Wisconsin Card
Sorting test which is a measure of
executive, or frontal lobe functioning were significantly correlated
with poorer insight into illness.

Keshavan et al.

2004

Schizophrenia Research,
70, 187-194.

Deficits in insight may be related to
a generalized dysfunction of neural
networks involved in memory,
learning, and executive functions.

Aleman et al.

2006

British Journal of Psychiatry,189, 204-212.

Neuropsychological dysfunction,
specifically impairment of set shifting and error monitoring, contributes to poor insight in psychosis.

2006

European Archives of
psychiatry and clinical
neuroscience, 60(5),
31-37.

Lack of insight in schizophrenia
may occur as a neurological disease
per se following brain damage that
seems related to frontal lobe areas.

2006

Schizophrenia Research,
86, 54-70.

Lack of insight is correlated to
lower scores on neuropsychological measures that assess executive
functions such as The Wisconsin
Card Sorting Test (WCST).

Schizophrenia Bulletin,
35 suppl.1, 286.

Lack of insight correlated with
verbal recognition performance
Lack of awareness is best accounted
for by poor verbal recognition
performance.

Young et al.

Laroi et al.

Pia & Tamietto

Shad et al.

Sartory et al.

2009

THE ROOT OF THE PROBLEM ▪ 49

Anosognosia versus Denial
Often I am asked the question: “How can I know whether
I am dealing with anosognosia versus denial?” There are three
main things you should look for:
1. The lack of insight is severe and persistent (it lasts for months
or years).
2. The beliefs (“I am not sick,” “I don’t have any symptoms,”
etc.) are fixed and do not change even after the person is
confronted with overwhelming evidence that they are wrong.
3. Illogical explanations, or confabulations, that attempt to
explain away the evidence of illness are common.
Ideally, you would also want to know if neuropsychological
testing revealed executive dysfunction. But regardless of whether
the problem is neurologically based or stems from defensiveness,
or both, the most important question is: How can you help this
person to accept treatment? That is the focus of the rest of this
book. Remember, the cause of the severe and persistent “denial”
may be less important than how you choose to deal with it.
One last thing. Many people despair that they will never be
able to help their loved ones if the denial is, in fact, a symptom of
their illnesses. You may be feeling that way right now. The rest of
this chapter is for you.
A Broken Brain Is Easier to “Fix”
The bottom line to all of this research is that, more likely than
not, a broken brain is creating barriers to insight and acceptance of
treatment in the mentally ill person you’re trying to help. But that
is no reason to despair. There are two immediate ways in which
you can use this knowledge to benefit your loved one and yourself.
First, when faced with the frustration of trying to convince
him or her to get help, remember the enemy is brain dysfunction, not

50 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

the person. This shift in your thinking can go a long way toward
lowering your level of frustration, increasing your effectiveness,
and building a collaborative relationship with the person you are
trying to help. Secondly, this knowledge can be used to rekindle
hope that you will be able to help your loved one accept the help
that’s being offered.
Hope? As I said before, if you’re like most people, reading
the results of the research I reviewed above may have left you
feeling more pessimistic (or confused) than optimistic. After all,
brain damage is irreparable, isn’t it? If poor insight is another
symptom of brain dysfunction, then what is there to hope for?
A common myth is that personality traits like stubbornness
or defensiveness are far easier to fix than deficits caused by brain
damage. In fact, however, it is far more difficult to change a
person’s personality than to teach him how to compensate for
some forms of brain dysfunction. So, although the notion that
brain dysfunction can cause poor insight may at first lead you to
feel powerless, it is actually grounds for renewed hope.
Rehabilitation is possible following many types of brain
damage, 1) because some brain cells can be repaired and 2) more
often, because functions can be re-routed to other, undamaged
parts of the brain. In such cases, doctors carefully assess the
deficits caused by the lesions and create a plan to compensate
for the loss of ability. This is the usual practice following strokes,
brain tumors, head injuries, and other causes of central nervous
system damage. In fact, rehabilitation specialists are trained
specifically for this task, which is frequently referred to as cognitive
remediation.
This approach is highly relevant to the task of helping the
seriously mentally ill individual develop awareness of his or her
illness and the new skills needed to become willing and active
participants in treatment. In the chapters that follow, you will
learn how to evaluate the nature and severity of the awareness

THE ROOT OF THE PROBLEM ▪ 51

deficits your loved one has, and to devise a plan for helping him
compensate for these deficits. With this method, you can help him
develop the kind of insight he needs to cope effectively with the
illness and accept treatment. The good news is that accomplishing
this can be much easier than you might think.

Part II
How to Help Using
LEAP
“You can’t always get what you want.
But if you try sometime,
you just might find,
you get what you need!”
Mick Jagger and Keith Richards
The Rolling Stones, Let it Bleed, 1969

53

4
The Right and Wrong
Approach
“Tell me one last thing,” said Harry. “Is this real?
Or has this been happening in my head?”
Dumbledore beamed at him…”Of course it is happening in your
head, Harry, but why on earth should that mean it is not real?”
J.K. Rowling, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, 2007, page 723

D

r. Karen Holloway sighed and said, “Michael’s back,” as she
walked toward where I was sitting in the nurse’s station. “I
need you to go to the E.R. and do his admission,” she added.
“Michael Kass?” I asked, incredulous.
“Afraid so,” Karen replied, a bit amused by my surprise.
“Get used to it, Xavier. Some patients are stuck in the revolving
door, and Michael’s one of them.”
This was 1988 and Karen was the chief resident at the
hospital in New York City where I was an intern. To this day, she
remains one of the more compassionate, bright and level-headed
clinicians with whom I have ever had the pleasure of working.
The diagnosis of “Revolving Door Patient” was not one she made
lightly or without compassion.
Michael Kass had been discharged from the hospital only six
weeks earlier after a one-month hospitalization. When he left, he
was no longer hearing voices. His delusions still lingered, but he
felt little pressure to talk about them, and he was scheduled to
receive follow-up treatment in one of our outpatient clinics.
54

THE RIGHT AND WRONG APPROACH ▪ 55

Judging by Karen’s comment, I guess I hadn’t hidden my
disappointment and surprise that he was back so soon. I took the
stairs two at a time, eight floors down, to the Emergency Room—
no use waiting for the overburdened elevators—and walked to the
door labeled “Psych ER.” Behind this door, sequestered from the
rest of the ER service, was a suite of five rooms with four patient
bays to the left and the nurses’ station to the right. As I entered,
I took a quick right and ducked into the nurses’ station—I didn’t
want Michael to know I was there until I’d had a chance to talk to
the triage nurse. The report I got was frustrating to hear.
After leaving the hospital, Michael had gone home to live
with his parents but had not shown up for his first outpatient
appointment. His parents, in their late sixties, hadn’t known that
Michael hadn’t gone to see his doctor. They’d asked about his
appointment, but he hadn’t wanted to talk about it. They’d called
the clinic, but no one would tell them whether or not their 35-yearold son had kept his doctor’s appointment. They also hadn’t
known that after the one-week supply of medications he’d been
given when leaving the hospital had run out, he’d never had the
prescription refilled.
I spent about twenty minutes looking at his old chart, which
the triage nurse had ordered up from medical records. Then I
stepped out of the nurses’ station and greeted my new-old patient.
“Hi, Michael, how are you?”
“Dr. Amadorafloor! What are you doing here?” he answered,
clanging6, laughing, and talking a mile a minute. “You’ve got to get
me out of here! I was minding my own business—I wasn’t hurting
anyone—and the police got it all wrong. Get me out of here, okay?
You’ve got to get me out because...”
I tried to interrupt. “Michael, Michael, hold on, wait up a
minute!”
6. A feature of thought disorder, a frequent symptom of psychosis, that involves word
associations based on rhyme.

56 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

“I’m not supposed to be here. They’ll find me here if I stay.
Gotta go, gotta get out, okay?”
“Michael, try to slow down and tell me what happened.
Okay?”
“I’m telling you what happened. I’m not supposed to be
here,” he shot back, clearly annoyed with me.
It took almost an hour to get through the checklist I was
trained to use. I completed a mental status exam7, evaluated his
current symptoms, and listened to his version of what had
happened and why he was in the Psych ER. Excusing myself
while he was again pleading with me to get him out, I escaped to
the nurses’ station once again, to write down what I had learned.
Michael was once again hearing the voices of government
agents who were commenting on his every move. While we were
talking, I asked him what the voices were saying and he repeated,
“He is sitting on the bed, talking with that doctor. He can’t escape
us now.” Given the voices he was hearing, it isn’t surprising
he’d developed the delusion that some secret federal agency was
monitoring his movements and planning to assassinate him.
I noted in his chart the re-emergence of the hallucinations
and exacerbation of the longstanding delusion about government
agents persecuting him. I also noted that he was not currently
suicidal or homicidal, that his “insight into illness” was poor, and
a number of other observations I had made while interviewing
him. My written recommendation was to restart the antipsychotic
medication he’d been on when he was discharged six weeks
before and to admit him to our inpatient psychiatric unit “for
stabilization.” Then I went back to see Michael, told him my
recommendation, and asked him to sign himself into the hospital
for a couple of weeks.
7. A cornerstone of psychiatric assessment, the mental status exam involves an
assessment of the clarity of consciousness, memory, attention, emotion, thought process,
insight into illness, and various symptoms of mental illness.

THE RIGHT AND WRONG APPROACH ▪ 57

He refused, saying, “The only thing wrong with me is that
I’m going to get killed if I stay here any longer!”
Since he had been found hiding in a subway train tunnel and
had struggled with the police when they extracted him, I thought
we had a fairly good case for an involuntary admission. When
he was found, he hadn’t eaten or bathed in several days and he
had made camp dangerously close to an active track, explaining
to police that “they [the federal agents] would never think to
look for me here.” I called Dr. Holloway—she agreed, and the
appropriate papers were signed to admit him against his will for
72 hours. If he didn’t want to stay after the 72 hours, and if at that
time we felt he was still a danger to himself because of his mental
illness, we would take him before a mental health court and try to
get a judge to order thirty days of involuntary treatment.
When I explained the plan to Michael, he understandably
went ballistic. He was terribly frightened and felt certain that
he would be killed if he stayed in the hospital. However, after
accepting medication by injection, he calmed down considerably
and was moved upstairs to the psychiatric ward.
Unless something was done to engage Michael in treatment,
this hospitalization would be nothing more than a band-aid.
Though we had resolved the current crisis, unless something
was done to engage Michael in treatment, this hospitalization
would be nothing more than a band-aid. He would be “stabilized”
and discharged with prescriptions he would never fill and an
appointment he would never keep because, as he put it, “I am not
sick! I don’t need medicine—I need protection from the feds!”
The Wrong Approach
I was using the medical model with Michael, which, in most
cases, is the wrong approach to take for dealing with the long-term

58 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

issue of poor insight and refusal to take medicine. The medical
model is supposed to work, more or less, in the following way:
Once the diagnosis and treatment are decided upon, the patient
is informed of both. If the patient refuses, and if he fits the legal
criteria for an involuntary admission to a hospital, the doctors
take charge. In some cases, medical doctors operating under a
benevolent paternal ethic are able to order treatment against a
person’s wishes. Like a parent who knows what’s best for her
child, the physician can take control by admitting the person
and treating him against his will. We abide by similar, though
less dramatic laws every day (e.g., laws that require seatbelts;
mandatory rabies inoculation of pets; motorcycle helmets; those
that prohibit drunk driving, etc.).
My next task, under this model, was to educate Michael
about his illness and the need for treatment. If you are reading this
book, you know that when it comes to individuals like Michael,
education about their illness does not translate into their gaining
insight. And, indeed, that is what happened over the two-week
period Michael was in the hospital.
I told him all about delusions and hallucinations and
confronted him about his “denial” of the illness. I explained to him
the nature of the problems he had and why he should accept the
treatment being offered. As during his previous hospitalization,
once he became more stable, he readily agreed that he would
take the medication when he left the hospital. When I told him I
thought he was just saying that so he could get out of the hospital,
he sometimes sheepishly admitted to the lie and told me there
was nothing wrong with him except the fact that people wouldn’t
leave him alone. But most often he would stick to the party line
and say, “I know the medication helps me and that I need to
take it.” Ironically, as some of his symptoms responded to the
medication, he got better at consistently feigning allegiance to the
doctor’s orders.

THE RIGHT AND WRONG APPROACH ▪ 59

For people with serious mental illness who are unaware of
their illness, this traditional approach rarely works. It rests on the
mistaken assumption that the patient has come to see the doctor
because he feels he has a problem and wants help. It assumes a
collaborative approach from the start—the doctor as an ally, not
an adversary.
Although the details might differ, Michael’s story of
hospitalization, followed by outpatient noncompliance,
worsening illness and readmission to the hospital, is all too
typical. So was my inadequate response to the bigger problem of
what would happen to him when we were done with him (again).
I was operating under a medical model that focused on the tasks
of diagnosis and treatment. This is the wrong approach when
dealing with someone who has, for many years, consistently
argued that there is nothing wrong with him and doesn’t need
help. It’s not a bad approach for the short term, but it’s mostly
worthless over the long term because the “patient” doesn’t see
himself as a patient.
If you can imagine something like this happening to you, then
you have some idea of what it is like for someone with a mental
illness to have a delusion and anosognosia.
An analogy might be useful to help you understand why this
is so. Imagine I told you that that you did not live where you live.
You might laugh and tell me to stop joking around. But what if
I produced a restraining order from a court that ordered you to
stay away from what you told me was your home address?
Taking it further, let’s say you live with other people, perhaps
members of your family, and you saw that they had signed off
on this court order. What would you think? Then, imagine that
you then called them to ask why they’d signed off and they said
something like, “You seem like a nice person, but if you keep

60 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

coming around here we are going to call the police. You don’t
live here, and we don’t want to press charges, but we will if you
put us in that position. Please stop calling us. You need help!”
If you can imagine something like this happening to you,
then you have some idea of what it is like for someone with a
mental illness to have a delusion and anosognosia.
Stay with the analogy and imagine you went home only to
be arrested by the police. The nice people at your address did not
want to press charges, so the police took you to the ER. Would
you be receptive to my advice that you should take psychiatric
drugs for your “delusion” that you live where you know you
live? I doubt it. I have done this role play countless times and the
answer is always “No!” When I ask why, my role-play partner
usually laughs and says, “Because it’s the truth. I know who I am
and where I live!”
That’s what it’s like for a person with a serious mental illness
to have a delusion and anosognosia. The medical model will not
win this person’s trust or cooperation. Like you or me in this
situation, once the person is out of the hospital and on his own,
he will not take medicine. If you can see the situation from that
person’s perspective, it makes sense, doesn’t it?
The Right Approach
In my experience, it is often easy to change an adversarial
relationship into an alliance and long term engagement in
treatment. It takes focused effort, but it isn’t hard to do once you
learn the main lessons. The hardest part is putting aside your
preconceptions and remembering that no amount of arguing has
previously changed your loved one’s opinion.
My best advice to you is to stop trying to convince him he
is ill. When you accept your powerlessness to convince him you
know the answer to the penultimate question (is he, or is he not
mentally ill), you will begin to open doors you didn’t even know

THE RIGHT AND WRONG APPROACH ▪ 61

existed. Remember, if you had truly succeeded in convincing
your loved one he has a mental illness, you would not be reading
this book. The first step, therefore, is to stop arguing and start
listening to your loved one in a way that leaves him feeling that
his point of view—including his delusional ideas and the belief
that he is not sick—is being respected.
The first step, therefore, is to stop arguing and start listening to
your loved one in a way that leaves him feeling that his point
of view—including his delusional ideas and the belief that he is
not sick—is being respected.
Professor Dumbledore’s answer to Harry Potter’s question,
quoted at the start of this chapter, is exactly right. For all intents
and purposes, your loved one’s experience is very real indeed. To
him, he is truly not sick.
If you can relate to your loved one in this way, you will be
much closer to becoming his ally and working together to find the
reasons he may have to accept treatment—even though he is not
sick. You don’t have to agree with his reality—the “realness” of
his experience—but you do need to listen and genuinely respect it.
My colleagues and I have helped many patients accept
treatment for a wide range of problems they feel have nothing
to do with mental illness: e.g., to relieve the stress caused by
the conspiracy against them; to help them sleep; to get their
families “off their back”; to lower the volume on the voices being
transmitted by the CIA, etc.
Even so, I don’t expect you to immediately embrace this idea.
Most people find it counter-intuitive and even a little scary. Others
like the concept of stepping back from the debate about whether
or not the person is ill but are not sure about how it is going to
help. Let me start addressing these concerns by describing my
approach and the science behind it.

62 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

Motivational Enhancement Therapy and LEAP
Anyone who has dealt with denial in a loved one knows that
it can’t be fixed simply by educating the person about the problem
he doesn’t believe he has. Such attempts are futile because the
“patient” doesn’t see himself as a patient. And, research shows
that confrontation and group “interventions” rarely work. In fact,
contrary to what most people believe, “interventions” often do
more harm than good!
So what does work? Motivational Enhancement Therapy
(MET) is a science-proven method that helps people in denial
accept treatment. It was first developed more than 20 years ago
for professionals like me who were working with substanceand alcohol-abusing patients. Unfortunately, despite its proven
effectiveness for engaging people with substance abuse problems
in treatment, few therapists are trained to use it with patients
who have serious mental illnesses. This needs to change, as there
is plenty of research to support using MET with such individuals.
In 2002, the American Journal of Psychiatry published a
review by Dr. Annette Zygmunt and her colleagues of studies
published over a 20-year period aimed at improving medication
adherence in schizophrenia. The researchers found that “…
although interventions and family therapy programs relying
on psychoeducation were common in clinical practice, they
were typically ineffective [with respect to improving adherence
to treatment]…Motivational techniques [on the other hand] were
common features of successful programs.” By “motivational
techniques,” the authors meant the main elements of MET.
I realized almost immediately that the specific
communication skills and strategies we were teaching
therapists could be learned by anyone.

THE RIGHT AND WRONG APPROACH ▪ 63

Relying on the same evidence base reviewed by Dr. Zygmunt
and her colleagues, Dr. Aaron T. Beck (considered by many to be
the “father” of cognitive psychology) and I developed a form of
MET we called “Medication and Insight Therapy” (MAIT) for an
inpatient research study to be used with people who have serious
mental illness.
At the time (mid-1990s), we taught this method only to
therapists. But I realized almost immediately that anyone
could learn the specific communication skills and strategies we
were teaching. I felt it was more a communication style than a
complicated therapeutic intervention and came to believe that you
don’t need an M.D., M.S.W., or Ph.D. to use the main elements of
this therapy effectively. Consequently, I developed a lay-friendly
version that can be taught to family members, individuals in law
enforcement and mental health professionals alike.
Listen-Empathize-Agree-Partner (LEAP) method
The result was the Listen-Empathize-Agree-Partner (LEAP)
method. Over the past ten years, since the publication of the first
edition of this book, I have taught LEAP to thousands of people
across the country and overseas. Although the focus of my LEAP
workshops was to show family members and health providers
how to convince someone with serious mental illness to accept
treatment, people at every seminar have commented on the
usefulness of this method across a range of problems. That has
been my experience as well.
So whether or not you believe your loved one has anosognosia
for mental illness, or simple denial of illness, LEAP can help.

5
Learning to LEAP

W

hen I was five years old I wanted to be Batman. It’s true that
Superman, Spiderman and the Hulk were also appealing,
but for me they were all a distant second to the “caped crusader.”
It wasn’t his mask and ears, which I remember thinking looked
goofy—it was that amazing “Bat Utility Belt.” I had to have a
Batman costume for Halloween—nothing else would do—and I
still remember how I felt when I strapped on that belt for the first
time. I had the power to do good—I could conquer all evil, set
things right and live to tell the tale.
The best thing about Batman was that he was a regular
person. He did not have superpowers—it was his tool belt that
set him apart. There were many high tech tools in his belt, but my
favorite was the grappling hook, attached to a dental-floss-thin
rope, that he used to walk up the sides of buildings. With those
tools, there was no wall he could not climb, no obstacle he could
not overcome. There was no enemy he could not defeat.
I want you to imagine that you, too, have a tool belt. It can
be made of any material you like, stylish (Dolce and Gabbana)
or purely functional (Craftsman). Imagine it is full on the left
side with all the tools we use when relying on the medical
and psychoeducational approaches (e.g., making a diagnosis,
educating the person about his diagnosis, giving him his prognosis
and prescriptions for treatment, reality testing about delusions,
etc.). These tools are highly effective when we are dealing with
persons who have insight and want our help—ideal for persons
who identify themselves as patients or consumers.
Now, I want you to imagine that your tool belt is empty on
the right side. Loops, hooks, and pockets all lay open and ready to
64

LEARNING TO LEAP ▪ 65

receive the tools you will need to help someone accept treatment
even though he does not believe he is ill. I’m going to provide
you with the tools to fill that side of your belt. They will serve you
well, but you’ll have to practice using them.
The first and most important tool you will put in your belt
is the focus of next chapter—the Reflective Listening Tool. But you
will also learn how not to “buy into delusions” while listening
without judgment and how to delay giving your opinion when
asked potentially deal-breaker questions like, “So, do you think
I’m sick and should take this medicine?” I will also explain all the
reasons you should delay answering such questions and how to
choose the right time to give your opinion, and provide a tool for
giving your opinion in a manner that allows your loved one to save
face, retain dignity, not feel betrayed and most importantly, stay
in the conversation and not walk away.
To make all this happen you have to put your goal of convincing
your loved one he is sick high up on a shelf,
at least for the time being.
I think you will find that LEAP’s effectiveness for dealing
with someone in denial or with anosognosia is immediately
intuitive. Once you learn the basic principles, it simply makes
sense that it will work far better than what you’ve been doing all
along. The core tools are Listening (using “reflective” listening),
Empathizing (strategically—especially about those feelings you’ve
ignored during your previous arguments about your loved one’s
being sick and needing treatment), Agreeing (on those things you
can agree on and agreeing to disagree about the others), and
ultimately Partnering (forming a partnership to achieve the goals
you share).
More often than not, the first aim of LEAP is to repair the
damage done to the relationship by your (or other’s) previously

66 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

adhering to the medical model and taking the “doctor knows best
approach.” The second task is to help your loved one find his own
reasons to accept treatment. To make all this happen you have to
put your goal of convincing your loved one he is sick high up on
a shelf, at least for the time being.
Listen with only one goal: to understand the other person’s
point of view and reflect your understanding back to him
The cornerstone of LEAP is reflective listening. It is also
the one feature of the method that immediately turns down the
volume on everyone’s anger, builds trust, and mends fences. The
reason is that you listen with only one goal: to understand the
other person’s point of view and reflect your understanding back
to him. You don’t comment on what he said, point out ways in
which you think he’s wrong, judge, or react in any way. (Sounds
easy until the person starts talking about the fact that there’s
absolutely nothing wrong and he doesn’t need treatment!)
Listen
Reflective listening is a skill that needs to be cultivated—it
doesn’t come naturally to most people. To succeed, you will need
to learn to really listen and not react to what your loved one feels,
wants, and believes. Then, after you think you understand what
you are told, you need to reflect to him or her, in your own words,
your understanding of what you just heard.
The trick is to do this without commenting, disagreeing, or
arguing. If you succeed, your loved one’s resistance to talking
with you about treatment will lessen and you will begin to gain
a clear idea of his experience of the illness and the treatment he
doesn’t want. When you know how your loved one experiences
the idea of having a mental illness and taking psychiatric drugs,
you will have a foothold you can use to start moving forward.

LEARNING TO LEAP ▪ 67

But you will also need to know what his hopes and expectations
are for the future, whether or not you believe they’re realistic. If you
can reflect back an accurate understanding of these experiences,
hopes, and expectations, your loved one is going to be much more
open to talking with you. More importantly, he is going to be
much more open to hearing what you have to say.
Empathize
The second tool for your tool belt involves learning when and
how to express empathy. If there were a moral to each technique,
the one for empathizing would go something like this: If you want
someone to seriously consider your point of view, be certain he feels you
have seriously considered his. Quid pro quo. That means you must
empathize with all the reasons he has for not wanting to accept
treatment, even those you think are “crazy.” And you especially
want to empathize with any feelings connected to delusions (such
as fear, anger, or even elation, if the delusion is grandiose). But
don’t worry—empathizing with how a particular delusion makes
one feel is not the same as agreeing that the belief is true. This
may seem like a minor point, but, as you will learn, the right kind
of empathy will make a tremendous difference in how receptive
your loved one is to your concerns and opinions.
Agree
Find common ground and stake it out. Knowing that what
you want for your loved one is something he does not want for
himself can make it seem as if there is no common ground. You
want him to admit he’s sick and accept treatment. He doesn’t
think he’s sick, so why in the world would he take medicine for an
illness he doesn’t have? To avoid coming to an impasse, you need
to look closer for common ground and for whatever motivation
the other person has to change. Common ground always exists,
even between the most extreme opposing positions.

68 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

You will now be able to present the idea that
medication might help him to achieve his goals.
The emphasis here is on acknowledging that your loved one
has personal choice and responsibility for the decisions he makes
about his life. When you use the Agreement tool, you become a
neutral observer, pointing out the various things you do agree
upon. If invited, you can also point out the positive and negative
consequences of decisions your loved one has made. That means
refraining from saying things like, “See, if you had taken your
medication, you wouldn’t have ended up in the hospital.”
Your focus is on making observations together—identifying facts
upon which you can ultimately agree. Rather than making an
observation or statement about what happened, you ask a lot of
questions, such as, “So what happened after you decided to stop
taking your medication?” “Did the voices quiet down after you
stopped?” “After you stopped taking the medication, how long
was it before you went to the hospital?”
If you have been using reflective listening and empathy,
your loved one is going to feel that you are an ally rather than
an adversary, and getting answers to such questions will be a
lot easier than it may sound. When you put aside your agenda
for the time being, you can find a great deal of common ground.
For example, if the answer to the question about what happened
after the medicine was stopped was, “I had more energy but
also I couldn’t sleep and got scared,” you can agree with that
observation without linking it to having a mental illness.
At this point in the process you will know the motivations
your loved one has to accept treatment (e.g., “sleep better,” “feel
less scared,” “get a job,” “stay out of the hospital,” “stop people
from bothering me about being ill,” etc.) that may have nothing
to do with the belief he or she has a mental illness. You will know

LEARNING TO LEAP ▪ 69

what his short and long term goals are because you will have
talked about them together. And, with this knowledge, you will
now be able to present the idea that medication might help him to
achieve his goals. I can’t emphasize this enough—your suggestions
should have nothing to do with the notion that your loved one has a
mental illness.
Partner
Forming a partnership to achieve shared goals is the last
and, in my experience, the most satisfying tool you will use.
Once you know the areas where you can agree (e.g., staying out
of the hospital, getting a job, going back to school, getting an
apartment, etc.), you can now collaborate on accomplishing those
goals. Unlike the previous techniques, this one involves both
of you making an explicit decision to work together, to become
teammates striving for the same goal. You may call the prize
“recovery from illness,” while your loved one calls it “getting a
job,” but the names are irrelevant to arriving at a shared plan of
action that will, more often than not, involve accepting treatment
and services.

6
Listen

I

n my LEAP seminars, I always ask, “Why would anyone want
to listen to you if he felt you had not first listened to him? Quid
pro quo.”
This important psychological principle—which is the
cornerstone of my method for breaking an impasse—is far from
new. More than 2,000 years ago, the Roman poet Publilius Syrus
said, “We are interested in others when they are interested in us.”
Psychologists who are expert in conflict resolution and marriage
and family therapy have written about this fundamental principle
for decades. Dale Carnegie, author of the 70-year-old best-seller
How to Win Friends and Influence People writes, “Philosophers have
been speculating on the rules of human relations for thousands of
years, and out of all that speculation, there has evolved only one
important precept. It is not new. It is as old as history. Zoroaster
taught it to his followers in Persia twenty-five hundred years ago.
Confucius preached it in China twenty-four centuries ago. Jesus
taught it among the stony hills of Judea nineteen centuries ago.
Jesus summed it up in one thought—probably the most important
rule in the world: “Do unto others as you would have others do
unto you.”
More recently, the authors of Getting to Yes, The 7 Habits of
Highly Effective People, Good to Great, How to Argue and Win Every
Time and other insightful observers of human relations have all
emphasized this same fundamental principle of persuasion. But
despite the ancient lineage and popular dissemination of this
simple and logical truth, it is too often overlooked when we are
lured into an “I’m right, you’re wrong” situation and end up
thrashing around like a fish caught on the end of a line, certain that
if we try just hard enough (i.e., speak more loudly or repeat our
70

LISTEN ▪ 71

position once again), we will win. And sometimes we do succeed
in bending the other person to our will, but not without doing
some damage. Listening with genuine curiosity and respect is the
key to not getting stuck in this trap and opening the other person
to caring about your opinion.
It was 7:30 a.m. and morning rounds had begun on the ward
where I worked as an attending psychologist. The entire day shift
was seated in a circle around the room. Doctors, nurses, social
workers and assorted students were, or soon would be, repeating
this ritual on inpatient psychiatric wards all over the country.
The chief of the unit, a psychiatrist, called the meeting
to order and then Marie, the head nurse, took over. She began
by reviewing how each patient had fared the night before.
When she came to Samantha, a 40-year-old single woman with
chronic schizophrenia, she paused and sighed before beginning.
“Samantha Green, stable on six milligrams of Risperdal. She slept
well last night and is ready for discharge today. Jo Anna,” she
asked the senior social worker, “do you want to fill everyone in
on the discharge plan?”
“Sure. It’s a real gem,” responded Jo Anna sarcastically.
“Samantha is going back to her parents’ house and has an
outpatient appointment with her doctor set for a week from
today. Mr. and Mrs. Greene are picking her up at noon and she’s
walking out the door with a one-week supply of medication.”
“You don’t sound too pleased with the plan,” I commented.
“It’s nothing personal,” she replied, knowing that Samantha
and her parents also had an appointment with me for a family
meeting. “The plan is all right—it’s Samantha I’m not pleased
with!” She paused, and then added, “Look, we all know what’s
going to happen. Call me cynical, but I’ll bet you ten dollars she
stops taking her medication before the end of the month and
she’ll be back here before you know it. She needs long-term
hospitalization, not another trip through the revolving door.”

72 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

Samantha had been admitted to the hospital four times in the
past year. Each episode of illness had been triggered when she
secretly stopped taking her medication. Her parents would notice
her talking to herself and start to worry that she was not taking
her pills. Her mother would then ask if this was so, and Samantha
would invariably deny it, even though she had not taken them for
weeks. By the time the truth came out, it was usually too late and
she needed to be hospitalized.
To my ears, Jo Anna’s lack of faith in Samantha, her parents,
and in me was neither cynical nor insulting. Given Jo Anna’s
experience and perspective, she would have been foolish to
expect anything more than she did. However, if Jo Anna had
known what I knew, she might have shared my optimism for
Samantha and her family.
I knew why Samantha didn’t want to take psychiatric drugs.
It had taken some effort to uncover the true reasons, but with that
knowledge and a good idea of what Samantha wanted out of life,
I knew I could help her stay on her medication, in treatment, and
out of the hospital. But Jo Anna and the rest of the hospital staff
hadn’t learned what I had, because they were focusing on other
things.
In the climate of managed care and increasing advances
in drug therapies for serious mental illness, mental health
professionals working in hospitals have become increasingly
specialized. Psychiatrists evaluate health and symptoms and
order medications. Psychologists working on inpatient wards
typically perform psychological assessments and, less often, do
therapy. Nurses dispense medications, monitor patients’ health
and safety, and provide education about the treatments received.
Social workers evaluate the patients’ discharge needs and make
arrangements for outpatient treatment and residence. As a
psychologist working with the seriously mentally ill, I know a
good deal about the medications used to treat the disorder but

LISTEN ▪ 73

I don’t prescribe them. My job is different—understanding the
person and how the illness has affected his sense of self and goals
is one of my areas of focus. And that is why I was optimistic about
stopping the revolving door Samantha was stuck inside.
Unlike the others, I knew how Samantha experienced being
ill and what she thought about the drugs we were “pushing” on
her. I also had a clear understanding of what it was she wanted
out of life, and that knowledge had helped me to get her to agree
to a trial of the medication as an outpatient. Unlike the other
times she’d been hospitalized, she was not agreeing to take the
medicine to placate us so she could get out—she was agreeing
to continue (for a time) to see if it could help her achieve one of
her goals. In other words, I had been doing a lot of listening, and
what I had learned gave me a foothold with Samantha and reason
to have hope.
Building a Treatment Agreement
The cornerstone of building a treatment agreement that will
work and outlast your direct involvement is cut from the quarry
of your loved one’s sense of who she is, what she believes she
is capable of doing, and what she wants out of life. Unless you
know its shape, color, texture, and strength, you will be unable
to build on this foundation. Each stone you lay will topple and
fall to the ground unless you have listened and learned about
her experience of these things. Specifically, you want to ask about
her:
• beliefs about having a mental illness
• experience and attitudes about medication
• concept of what she can and cannot do
• hopes and expectations for the future

74 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

In the next three chapters, I will show you how to put your
knowledge of these areas to practical use. But before we get there,
you have to know your loved one’s answers to each of these
questions. And, because serious mental illness often changes
the way people communicate with one another and what each
person wants to talk about, there are some common pitfalls you’ll
need to avoid. The best way to do that is by learning how to use
reflective listening.
Reflective Listening
We all know how to listen. But I’m not talking about
“everyday listening.” I’m talking about reflective listening, which
is very different.
When you’re doing it right, you’re asking a lot of questions.
You sound like a journalist conducting an interview.
Reflective listening has, as its sole purpose, understanding
what the other person is trying to convey and then communicating
that understanding back without commenting or reacting in any
way. It is an active, rather than passive process—your role is
purely that of a listener who wants to get it right. When you’re
doing it right, you’re asking a lot of questions. You sound like a
journalist conducting an interview.
I’ll give you an example of how and why something that
seems so simple doesn’t come naturally.
All my life, people have told me I am a naturally good listener.
As a psychotherapist, I pride myself on my ability to listen and
understand other people’s experience. But everything I thought I
knew about listening was put to the test the first few times I tried
to converse with people in denial about having a serious mental
illness.
I was 23 years old when I took a job as a psychiatric technician

LISTEN ▪ 75

(a.k.a. nursing aide) on an inpatient psychiatric ward at the
University of Arizona Medical Center. My brother Henry’s first
psychotic episode had occurred less than a year before, and despite
his rambling speech and crazy ideas, I could still understand him.
My experience with my brother had given me a lot of confidence. I
have listened to many bizarre things, I thought. I can do this.
As a psychiatric technician, I was responsible for assessing,
among other things, how agitated, depressed, elated, suicidal or
dangerous my patients were. I was also charged with determining
whether my patients were following the prescribed treatment
plan. Every conversation had a hidden agenda.
My very first admission evaluation was with Barbara, a
42-year-old woman who was in the throes of a grandiose delusion
and irritable manic episode. She was talking a-mile-a-minute
about her power to read minds, her supernatural abilities, the
alien implant in her brain that had given her these powers, and
the fact that she didn’t need to be in the hospital. And she was very
angry about being there.
With a bright red, hospital-issued clipboard on my knee,
I diligently started with the list of questions that were printed
neatly in rows on the evaluation form. “Can you tell me why you
came to the hospital?”
“Can you tell me why you came to the hospital?” She mimicked
me with disdain, effectively humiliating me for being a rookie.
I quickly countered, trying to recover my composure. “I am
sorry. You were brought here by your husband. That’s right, isn’t
it?”
“I am sorry. You were brought here by your husband. That’s
right, isn’t it?” she echoed sarcastically.
Stating the obvious, I said, “It sounds like you don’t want
to talk right now. I am sorry, but I have to get through these
questions.” I pleaded with her, despite the fact that I was feeling
even more humiliated and was also starting to get angry.

76 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

“I don’t give a shit about your f__king questions!”
“I’m sorry, but I really do need to get through these questions.”
“Grow up, little boy. You better realize who you’re dealing
with here. You don’t know what you’ve gotten yourself into and
you are in way over your head. Way over your head. Maybe I’ll
have your head. I could, you know. It’s as easy as snapping my
fingers or blinking an eye or squashing the wings of a butterfly!”
She shouted in rapid fire before bursting into hysterical laughter.
My agenda was moot, my face a bright shade of red. I know,
because she made a point of telling me as I was excusing myself
and trying to walk—not run—out the door. I was scared and
angry. I went to the nurses’ station and plopped down next to
Nancy, the charge nurse.
“You got that done fast,” she said incredulously.
“Not really. I didn’t get much done at all.”
“She wouldn’t answer your questions?”
“No. All she did was mimic my every word and threaten me.”
“Threaten you?!”
“Not exactly. At least not in reality. She was threatening me
with her God-like delusional powers.”
“Well, it seems like she may not be able to answer these
questions right now. What did you learn about her from just
sitting in the room?”
“Well, she’s angry and doesn’t want to be here. She’s in denial.
She’s manic, irritable, and grandiose. And she doesn’t want to talk
to me. Maybe someone else should give it a shot.”
“No. She’s your patient. I just gave her some medicine—give
her a couple of hours to calm down a little, then try again. Only
this time, don’t bring in the admission form. Start by asking her
if there’s anything she would like to say. Let her talk about why
she thinks she shouldn’t be here and see where it goes. Ask her
questions about that. That seems to be where she’s at. Look for an
opening to tell her you’re sorry she’s here.”

LISTEN ▪ 77

“God knows I’m sorry she’s here!” I said, joking, and feeling
better.
I saw the wisdom in Nancy’s advice. I followed her
suggestions and ultimately learned quite a bit about Barbara. But
it took putting my agenda on the back burner for me to listen to
what she was feeling about being forced to be a “mental patient”
in a psychiatric hospital. As a result, I was able to get my form
filled out. Some questions were not answered, but the essentials
were covered. (I will tell you more about Barbara later. But for
now, I want to focus on the other elements of reflective listening.)
To do it right, you have to drop your agenda. Your only goals
are to understand what your loved one is saying and
to convey that understanding.
It’s hard to listen reflectively in the face of all the distracting
“noise” of psychosis, especially if you are pursuing an agenda and
trying to follow a timetable. To do it right, you have to drop your
agenda, as I did with Barbara. Your only goals are to understand
what your loved one is saying and to convey that understanding.
This is very hard to do at first, but it’s not impossible and
actually gets quite easy once you “unlearn” your natural bad
habits. Reflective listening is a skill and, as with any skill, once
you know the basic principles, all you need to do is practice to get
it right. To start, here are seven guidelines for reflective listening:
Seven Guidelines for Reflective Listening
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Make it Safe
Know Your Fears
Stop Pushing Your Agenda
Let it Be
Respect What You’ve Heard
Find Workable Problems
Write the Headlines

78 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

1. Make it Safe
During the first few years he was ill, Henry never wanted
to talk to me about the medicine he was prescribed. He didn’t
feel safe. As you will learn later on, my brother and I argued
a lot for many years, going round and round on the issue of
whether or not he was sick and needed to take medicine. This
happened because we got into what I call the denial dance,
which creates pessimistic expectations about talking.
Let me tell you about one of my first experiences with this.
My brother had just come home from the hospital and
was doing well. The medication obviously helped him, but
within a day of his getting home, I found it in the garbage can.
Naturally, I asked him why he’d thrown it out.
“I’m okay now,” he explained. “I don’t need it anymore.”
This ran counter to everything he was told in the hospital,
so I made a point of reminding him. “But the doctor said you’re
probably going to have to be on this medicine for a rest of your
life. You can’t stop taking it!”
“He didn’t say that.”
I countered with, “Sure he did! I was at the family meeting,
remember?”
“No, he said I had to take it while I was in the hospital.”
“Then why did he give you a bottle of pills to take home?”
I argued, trying to prove him wrong.
“That’s just in case I get sick again. I’m fine now.”
“No, that’s not what he said.”
“Yes, it is.”
“Why are you being so stubborn? You know I’m right!” I
said.
“It’s my business. Leave me alone.”
“When you got sick it became everyone’s business. And
besides, I’m worried.”

LISTEN ▪ 79

“You don’t have to worry about me. I’m fine.”
“You’re fine now, but you won’t be if you don’t stay on the
medicine.”
“That’s not what the doctor said!”
“Then let’s call him and I’ll prove it!”
“I don’t want to talk about it! Just leave me alone,” he said
as he walked away.
With every dose of “reality” I tried to give him, Henry
countered with more denials. And with every go-round, we both
became angrier and angrier. I thought he was being stubborn
and immature. My accusations and threat to prove him wrong
made him even angrier and more defensive. My natural instinct
to confront his denial was completely ineffective and only
made things worse. We got caught in a cycle of confrontation
and denial that pushed us further apart and, not surprisingly,
left my brother feeling that it was not safe to talk with me about
these issues. The end result of conversations like this was that
he walked away. The dance always ends in avoidance.
Henry said it best after one of our early arguments. “Why
should I talk about this? You don’t care about what I think.
You’re just going to tell me I’m wrong and need to see a shrink!”
It wasn’t until I was in training to become a psychologist
that I finally understood that my brother wasn’t simply being
stubborn. Armed with more knowledge and experience, I
reflected on how I had talked to him and realized I had played
a big role in getting him to stop talking and start sneaking
(e.g., when he secretly threw his medicine in the garbage while
claiming he was still taking it).
I made him feel unsafe. He knew that if he said he wasn’t
sick and didn’t need medication, I was going to argue with
him. Sometimes I did it gently, but as the years wore on and
he became what mental health workers call a “frequent flyer,”

80 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

I was often harsh in my confrontation of his denial. Once, I even
planned an intervention involving several family members and
Henry’s social worker. We all, gently but powerfully, told him he
was in denial. One by one we told him he had schizophrenia and
needed to take psychiatric drugs to get better.
Now imagine if that happened to you (assuming you do not
have schizophrenia, which was exactly Henry’s point of view).
Imagine that this conversation followed on the heels of dozens
more like it. Would you really be interested in explaining, once
again, that there was nothing wrong with you and you didn’t
need medicine? No. Better to walk away or, if you can’t, shut up
and pretend to agree in order to get the conversation over with
quickly.
“I am sorry for not listening to you. I understand why you
don’t want to talk about this anymore.”
So how do we make it safe to talk? First, set aside a special
time. It can be over a cup of coffee, a walk, on top of a Ferris wheel!
Anywhere. What matters is how you introduce the conversation.
If you’ve had arguments in the past, you need to apologize
and acknowledge that you made your loved one feel unsafe.
You can say something like, “I am sorry for not listening to you.
I understand why you don’t want to talk about this anymore.”
And then normalize his reaction to you by saying something like,
“If I were in your shoes, I would feel the same way.” When you
apologize for jumping in with your opinion (which I call reactive
listening) and admit you would feel the same way he does, you
make it safe to talk.
But there’s more. You have to promise not to do it again. “I want
to hear more about why you hate the medicine and I promise I
won’t do anything but listen and try to get a better understanding
of your view on this. I promise not to give my opinion.”

LISTEN ▪ 81

You might be thinking, “Wait a minute! How can you help
someone in denial if you are not going to tell him the truth? Don’t
you have to help him see the problem and the solution?” Yes, you
do. But not yet…and not in the way you think.
Advice is a funny thing. It can be perceived as either welcome
or unwelcome, disrespectful, insensitive, and patronizing. What
determines how the advice will be received? Here’s an example.
Women who have been pregnant often complain about how
complete strangers walk up to them and give them unsolicited
advice. Sometimes it’s humorous; usually it’s irritating. But almost
always, they ignore the free advice because it was uninvited and
felt intrusive.
And yet, every woman I have talked to about this experience
admits that she had at least one friend or relative whose counsel
she sought and listened to. That’s the difference between solicited
and unsolicited advice. Advice that has been requested carries far
more weight than unwelcome advice. So, when you promise to
not give your advice because your main goal is to listen and learn,
you gain instant credibility. And I guarantee, as strange as this
may sound, that you will be asked for your opinion far sooner
than you would like.
So apologize for not listening well enough, promise you will
listen without comment, and keep the promise. To succeed, you will
need to discover why you have been afraid to listen in this way,
because if you don’t, the same fears that kept you from reflective
listening in the past will trip you up going forward.
2. Know Your Fears
Whenever I teach reflective listening to a new group of people
I am reminded how much more similar than different we all are.
On the outside, all sorts of differences jump out at me—the man
in the business suit sitting near the one in the “Guns Don’t Kill
People, People Kill People!” T-shirt and torn jeans; the large, loud

82 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

woman and the meek, diminutive one. People of all shapes, sizes,
religions, races, and politics come to LEAP seminars because they
all have a deep desire to help a loved one who is in denial. They
also have the same fear about taking that first step, the fear that, “I
will make it worse if I listen the way Dr. Amador says I should.”
During these seminars, I define reflective listening just as I
did above. Then I ask for a volunteer. Recently, I did this role-play
with Gwen in Halifax, Canada. Her job, as I explained it to her,
was simply to listen to me as I role-played a delusional patient,
and then reflect back what she had heard.
She looked confident as I began the role-play. Speaking
fast and sounding very angry and scared, I said, “Look, Gwen, I
am not sick, there’s nothing wrong with me. I’m not taking that
medicine because it will kill me. It’s poison. If you want to help
me, then help me with the people upstairs.”
“What about the people upstairs?” she asked, without
reflecting back what I had just said.
“Every night at eight o’clock, they walk across the floor of
their apartment to the bathroom. I hear them flush the toilet and
I know what they’re doing! I’m no fool! They’re communicating
with the group that’s trying to kick me out of my apartment.
They’re the same people who have been trying to kill me!”
Gwen, who had been nodding as I explained the problem,
answered, “So it sounds like the people upstairs are disturbing
you. They’re making a lot of noise?”
Seeing that she was done, I asked the audience, “Did Gwen
reflect back what I said?” Immediately numerous hands shot
up. One after the other, they described how she had not. They
saw what Gwen could not see in the moment—although she had
responded in the form of a question, as I had recommended,
she had not reflected back a single thing I had said. The closest
she came was mentioning that I was “disturbed” by the people
upstairs. In fact, however, I wasn’t disturbed. I was scared and

LISTEN ▪ 83

angry and it had nothing to do with their being “noisy” neighbors.
The noise didn’t bother me—it was their use of the toilet as a
signaling device that had me upset!
The audience was able to see that she had not reflected back
what I had said, but they didn’t do much better themselves when
several of them tried their hand at it. Like Gwen, they omitted
mentioning the “crazy” facts. The closest anyone came was
acknowledging that the toilet flushing was a signal to the other
people in the building who wanted “me” evicted. But they all
avoided talking about my denial, my belief that the medicine was
poison, and the stranger, more paranoid delusions (the conspiracy
of fellow tenants who were planning my murder).
After reassuring my volunteers that I used to make the same
mistakes with my brother before I learned reflective listening, I
modeled the correct way to do it. Playing the role of the listener
now, I said, “So, Xavier, tell me if I got this right. You’re not sick
and don’t need to take the medicine. What’s worse, the medicine
is poison. And the thing you want my help with has to do with
your neighbors. Every night at eight o’clock, your upstairs
neighbors walk into their bathroom and flush the toilet to signal
other people in the building. These are the same people who
have been trying to kick you out and also kill you. Do I have that
right?”
Not even halfway through saying this, I could see several
people squirming in their seats, shaking their heads, and
frowning. “I know that many of you are very uncomfortable with
what I just said. What makes you so uneasy?”
“You’re reinforcing the denial!” one man practically shouted.
“You can’t tell this guy his medicine is poison. He’ll never
take it!” Gwen added.
“What else worries you?” I asked the group.
“You worsened the delusion; now you’re going to get
drawn into it. He’s going to want you to do something about his

84 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

neighbors,” another man offered. A woman, who I knew to be
a social worker, raised her hand. “This goes against everything
I was taught. You can’t collude with a delusion like that. You’ll
reinforce it!”
I turned to the group. “Was anyone feeling okay about what
I did?” An elderly woman in the front row raised her hand.
“I thought it was fine,” she said. “He’s going to want to talk
with you because you are talking about what’s important. He
doesn’t believe he’s crazy and thinks people are trying to kill
him, for gosh sake!”
“So why do you think the rest of them are so uncomfortable
with my reflecting all that back to him?” I asked.
She slowly turned around to look at the audience, then,
turning to face me again, she said simply, “They’re chicken,”
and sat back down. After the laughter subsided, I thanked my
unexpected accomplice and elaborated on her wise observation.
When you’re facing someone who rigidly holds irrational
beliefs, you gain nothing by disagreeing.
First, I never agreed with his beliefs about being sick, the
medicine, or the paranoid ideas. By prefacing and ending my
statements with questions (“Tell me if I got this right” and “Do
I have that right?”), I was free to use my patient’s own words.
In no way did I challenge his beliefs. Why should I? He’s
delusional!
Rather, I showed him, through my actions, that I wanted only
to listen to him and understand. I have never talked anyone out
of a delusion and, to my knowledge, I have never talked anyone
into one either. The point is, when you’re facing someone who
rigidly holds irrational beliefs, you gain nothing by disagreeing.
More importantly, you lose that person’s willingness to talk
about the problem.

LISTEN ▪ 85

There are, however, a few pitfalls you have to watch out
for. One is when the person asks, “So it sounds like you agree
with me. Do you?” Or the flip side of the same coin: “Why are
you acting like you believe me?” Actually, these questions offer
an important opportunity, which I’ll talk about in the following
chapter. For now, I ask that you trust me—and for the time being,
focus on uncovering what your fears are.
3. Stop Pushing Your Agenda.
I know your agenda is to help someone you’re worried about.
And you have specific ideas about how the help should come.
But because the person in denial is already expecting unwelcome
advice for a problem he doesn’t believe he has, you need to keep
this agenda to yourself!
When reflectively listening, the only stated agenda you
should have is your desire to listen and learn. When a person
trusts that you will not pontificate about what he should and
should not be doing, he will be more apt to agree to talk about
certain “hot” topics (e.g., his refusal to seek professional help).
Agreeing on an agenda is easy if you follow the lead of the
person in denial. This is how I was finally able to engage Barbara.
What she wanted to talk about was how furious she was for being
forced into the hospital when she wasn’t mentally ill. If the person
you’re trying to talk to is upset about having to take medicine,
ask him about his feelings, not about the medicine or your belief
that he should take it. You can say, “I’d like to understand why
you hate taking your medicine. Would you mind talking with me
about that? I promise I won’t pressure you or bug you—I really
just want to understand how you feel about it.”
Try it once with any hot topic and see what happens.

86 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

4. Let it Be.
If the discussion turns into an argument and you feel the denial
dance coming on, stop! If your loved one becomes accusatory,
saying something like, “You don’t care about me, all you’re
thinking about is yourself,” just let it be. Don’t fan the flames.
Sometimes mental illness creates “thought disorder,” making
it especially difficult for others to follow the person’s train of
thought. It’s annoying and frustrating. When talking with someone
who has thought disorder, or disorganized speech, be careful
that you don’t inadvertently impose order on the chaos, because
usually you will get it wrong. In other words, let it be and focus on
listening differently instead of on trying to impose order. Listen for
the feelings behind the words and reflect back the emotion. When
you understand the underlying emotions, you will discover what
the person cares about most and what motivates him.
5. Respect what you’ve heard.
When you make it a point to communicate your understanding
of what you’ve just heard without reacting to it, you convey your
respect for the other person’s point of view. You also deflate anger.
When you echo what you’ve heard without comment or criticism,
you stop the denial dance dead in its tracks. Think of it this way:
Would you really be interested in hearing the opinion of someone
you’ve been arguing with if you felt he or she hadn’t listened to
your views?
6. Find Workable Problems.
Everyone in denial or with anosognosia, knows he has at least
one problem. The problem is you and everyone else who is telling
him he needs help!
He will have other problems you can uncover as well.
Understanding how the person in denial sees himself and his
beliefs about what’s not working in his life is the key to unlocking

LISTEN ▪ 87

the isolation and building a relationship with someone who
recognizes he is in trouble and needs help. A relationship with
someone who can lead him to that help is the only way he’ll find
it as long as he is unaware of the illness.
Consequently, you first need to learn what he thinks the
problem is. How does he define it? And what does he say he needs
to fix it? Without understanding what he thinks is wrong and
needs to change, you will be powerless.
For example, my brother never agreed that he had
schizophrenia, but he did think that being forced into a psychiatric
hospital again and again was a big problem. I couldn’t have
agreed with him more. Once you find a problem you can work
on together (e.g., Henry and I agreed that avoiding another
hospitalization was a good thing), you have common ground and
leverage. It is also vital that you find out what he wants out of
life—in the short term and long term—without being judgmental.
You need to find out what it is that is most important to him.
7. Write the Headlines
I started out by telling you that to do this right, you need to
approach your loved one the way a journalist would. That means
not only asking questions without injecting your criticism or other
opinions, but also discovering a theme and figuring out what the
“headlines” are. So, after a conversation in which you’ve been
reflectively listening, think of the front page of a newspaper and
literally write down the headlines. If you can, write them down
in front of the person (I will give you examples of how to do this
later), so that you know you are both on the same page about
what’s important to him.
So what are the “headlines”? The headlines are the problems
the mentally ill person believes he has (not the problems you say
he has) and the things that motivate him to change (those that
are most important to him). Ultimately you are going to work

88 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

together on the problem as he defines it, but link it to the help
you believe he needs. And you will do this by harnessing what
motivates him.
To illustrate these listening guidelines, I offer the following
two examples from families I have worked with. The first is a
good example of how not to listen while the second provides an
excellent lesson on how to do it right. Both examples are drawn
from my work supervising therapists in training on an inpatient
psychiatric ward. Because my students typically bring video
tapes of their sessions with families to our supervision meetings,
I can comment on both the therapist and the family members’
listening skills.
Ineffective Listening
It was 3 o’clock and Dr. Brian Greene, a second-year resident
in psychiatry, was meeting with Matt Blackburn and his parents.
Matt is the 26-year-old man who lives at home with his parents I
first told you about in Chapter 1.
As you may recall, he was admitted to the hospital believing
he was a close confidant of the U.S. President. He also believed
that God had chosen him as His special messenger to world
leaders, that the CIA was trying to assassinate him, and that his
mother was trying to sabotage his mission (this last belief was
not entirely delusional).
When he was admitted to the hospital, he was also hearing
voices and had thought disorder (rambling disconnected
thoughts strung together so that when he spoke it was often
difficult to make sense of what he was saying). After two weeks
of treatment at Columbia, his speech was more cogent and the
voices had quieted down a bit thanks to the medication he had
received. He still had the same delusional beliefs, but the drugs
helped relieve the pressure he felt to act on them (e.g., go to
Washington to meet with the President).

LISTEN ▪ 89

The meeting was called by Dr. Greene to discuss what
Matt would do after being discharged from the hospital. “Mr.
Blackburn, Mrs. Blackburn,” Brian said to each as he shook their
hands, “Please come in and have a seat.” Matt was already seated
at the end of a long table in the patient dining room.
His mother circled the table to reach her son and bent down
to give him a kiss. Mr. Blackburn immediately sat down in the
nearest chair, which was also the farthest from Matt, and started
asking questions of Dr. Greene. “I know we’re supposed to be
talking about Matt’s discharge, but don’t you think he needs to
stay here longer? I don’t think he’s ready to come home yet.”
“There’s really nothing more we can offer him here, Mr.
Blackburn,” Brian answered. (In truth, it probably would have
helped Matt to stay another week, but his insurance had run out.)
“Well, I don’t think he’s ready and neither does his mother!”
“Hold on,” Mrs. Blackburn said, “I didn’t say that exactly.
Of course, we want you to come home,” she said, directing her
last comment to Matt. “We’re just worried about what’s going to
happen next.”
Seizing the opportunity, Brian began. “Matt has an
appointment later this week with a doctor in our outpatient clinic.
He has enough medicine with him to last until that appointment,
and the hospital’s day program has accepted him. He can start
there as soon as the doctor has seen him.”
“This is exactly what I was afraid of,” said Matt’s father to his
wife. Then he turned to face Brian and added, “I don’t want to be
negative, Dr. Greene, but he’ll never go to that appointment and
he won’t go to this day program you’re talking about. He doesn’t
think there’s anything wrong with him. We need a better plan
than this. Matt won’t take his pills and he doesn’t like hanging
around the people in these programs. He says they’re all crazy!”
“Matt, what do you have to say about all this?” Brian rightly
asked.

90 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

He responded loudly, while looking down at the table. “I
said I’d go. I’ll go!”
“That’s what you promised us before, Matt,” said his father
in a kinder tone. “But when we get home, you disappear into
your room and you don’t go anywhere.”
“It’s different this time. I’ll go! I just want to get out of here
and get a job and my own place.”
“Are you sure you’ll go?” his mother asked, looking worried.
“Yeah, Mom, don’t worry, I’ll go. I really will. Okay?”
Matt’s father didn’t look convinced, but his mother and
doctor looked, if not convinced, at least relieved by what they
had just heard.
Let’s review the seven listening guidelines I gave above.

1. Did They Make It Safe?
Brian and Matt’s family did set aside a special time to talk but
did not make the conversation “special” in the way I described
above. There was no acknowledgment of their differing views
and no apology for previous attempts to convince Matt he was in
denial and mentally ill. No one explained that he or she wanted
only to hear Matt’s views on the discharge plan. And no promise
was made to refrain from giving unsolicited advice.
Instead, the old argument was immediately raised by his
father and the battle lines drawn. The result was that Matt got
defensive and then did what you and I would have done had we,
like Matt, been through this a hundred times before. He lied and
said he would go to the appointment. He lied to get his parents
and his doctor off his back and to get released from the hospital.

LISTEN ▪ 91

2. Did They Know Their Fears?
On the surface, Matt’s father and mother both appeared to
be in touch with the fear they felt going into this conversation.
But they were not. They were aware of their fear that their son
would continue his career as a “frequent flyer” or revolving-door
patient—but they had no awareness of the specific fear they had
about this conversation, which was that they would make things
worse if they didn’t make their views known once again.
Although she did it more gently than her husband, Matt’s
mother also laid down the battle lines. She wanted her son to
stay in the hospital longer. She made it very clear she thought he
was still very sick. Both parents, and Dr. Greene for that matter,
felt compelled by their fears to once again tell Matt, as if hearing
it once again would make a dent in his denial, that he was ill and
needed professional help. And yet, all three knew that Matt was
not going to follow up with the clinic appointment.
They could have talked about that with Matt directly. But to
do that they would have had to make it safe for him to talk, not let
fear rule the conversation and stop pushing their agenda.
3. Did They Stop Pushing Their Agenda?
Matt was about to leave yet another hospitalization, and
his parents and doctor knew he would not follow through with
their recommendations because he never had before. But that
didn’t stop the three of them from pushing their hopeless agenda
anyway.
Dr. Greene wanted to communicate the details of the posthospital treatment plans and “seal the deal” so to speak (even
though he admitted to me later that he knew Matt would never
follow through with the plan as it had been presented to him).
Matt wanted to leave the hospital and was willing, if that’s what
it took, to take medicine for the time being. How long he was
willing to stay on the medicine was never determined because

92 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

Matt did not trust his doctor or parents enough to be forthcoming
and reveal what his true feelings were. Mr. Blackburn openly
predicted that his son would stay on the medicine for less than
one week while Brian naively hoped that Matt would be willing
to follow doctor’s orders for months to come.
Mr. Blackburn was pursuing an agenda, which was trying
to convince Brian to hold Matt in the hospital longer. And
although Mrs. Blackburn was focused on the same agenda, she
was preoccupied with her guilt and with not wanting to hurt or
anger Matt.
What was Matt’s agenda? No one asked, so we really don’t
know, although I found out later.
4. Did They Let It Be?
Matt was not offering his opinion or saying he would not take
his pills. At least not directly. So there was little in the meeting for
his doctor and parents to react to. But his parents were reacting to
things Matt had said and done in the past. His father was angry
from the start, not only because the hospital was discharging his
son, whom he felt was too ill to come home, but also because he
didn’t believe Matt was telling the truth. When Matt said he’d
go to his appointment and take his medicine, his father reacted
essentially by calling him a liar (“That’s what you promised us
before, but when we get home you disappear into your room and
you don’t go anywhere.”). Although more subtle, Matt’s mother
also reacted to his reassurances with disbelief.
5. Did They Respect What They’d Heard?
No one echoed back to Matt what they understood him to be
saying. Matt’s views on whether he was ill and needed treatment
were not respected. There was at least one missed opportunity.
When Matt said, “This time is different,” his doctor or parents
could have replied, “So, Matt, I want to understand. You’re

LISTEN ▪ 93

saying this time is different. Is that right?” If such a question
had been asked, not with anger or sarcasm, but with genuine
curiosity, Matt would have answered yes, his defenses would
have dropped a notch, and he would have told them something
very important. This time really was different for him. He truly
did not want to come back to the hospital ever again, certainly not
the way he had this time (his parents had called the police, who
brought him to the hospital against his will).
And if they had echoed back what they heard and Matt had
felt they truly understood, a problem they all shared could have
been identified. They could have worked together to keep him out
of the hospital.
From Matt’s perspective, his parents were the reason for his
hospitalization. From theirs, it was the mental illness. But they all
agreed that no one wanted him to end up in the hospital again
(even the insurance company would have agreed to that). This
was a missed opportunity to help Matt drop his defenses and
turn down the volume on everyone’s anger.
Let me give you a feel for what I am talking about. Brian
was Matt’s doctor, and I was Brian’s supervisor, so sometimes I
met with the two of them together. During one of these meetings,
Matt had described the terror he felt when the police brought him
to the hospital. He had never felt so scared before and he never
wanted to feel that way again. And he had grown tired of being
hospitalized again and again. I asked him why he thought his
parents had called the police, and he answered, “Because they
think I’m sick.”
“But that doesn’t tell me why they would put you through
this.”
“They think I’m sick and need to be in the looney bin, that’s
why.”
“Let me ask the question differently. What’s motivating
them to do this to you? Do they hate you?”

94 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

“No.”
“Do they want to hurt you?”
“I don’t know. I don’t think so.”
“Then why would they call the police on their son?”
“They’re afraid, I guess.”
“Matt, let me see if I have this right. Your parents called the
police to bring you to the hospital against your will, not because
they hate you or want to hurt you, but because they’re afraid. Do
I have that right?”
“Yeah. That’s it.”
“What are they afraid about?”
“They’re afraid I’ll get hurt.”
“Now, I know you disagree with them on this, but before
we talk about that, let me see if I am following you so far. Your
parents were afraid you would get hurt so they wanted you in the
hospital to keep you safe. Is that right?” He nodded. “What does
that tell you about how your mom and dad feel about you?”
“They love me.”
“So you have a big problem here, don’t you? How do you
convince your parents to stop throwing you in the hospital? I
mean, you can’t convince them to stop loving you, can you?”
“No,” he said smiling.
“Then what?”
“I can’t convince them there’s nothing wrong with me.
You guys have all brainwashed them!” We both laughed at his
reminder that people like me—doctors—were at the root of his
problem.
“No. And they can’t convince you that you’re sick. So there
you are. What could you work on together?”
“I guess reassuring them so they don’t get scared and call
the police.”
“How can you do that?”
“There’s nothing I could do to convince them.”

LISTEN ▪ 95

“Nothing?”
“Well, no…not nothing. I could take the medicine.”
“But if I understand you, you’re not sick. Why would you
take medicine if there’s nothing wrong with you?”
“To keep them off my back!” he said laughing.
This conversation, though valuable, would have been
priceless had Matt had it with his parents. But because they were
afraid and unable to echo what they heard, they missed a chance
to find common ground with their son and work on the problem
they all agreed Matt had (i.e., hospitalizations against his will
were bad). By redefining the problem so that it was no longer
about the question of whether or not he was sick and needed
help, and clarifying that he knew his “misguided” parents were
motivated by love, Matt could have translated the impossible
problem he had into one that was workable.
6. Did They Find Workable Problems?
When it came to defining the problem, Matt, his parents,
and Dr. Greene were talking apples and oranges. Matt saw the
problem as his parents, the police who listened to them, and the
shrinks who had convinced his mother and father he was ill. His
parents and Dr. Greene saw the problem as Matt’s being stubborn,
immature, and defensive—he was not taking any responsibility
for the illness he clearly had. On the other hand, Matt and I had
easily found at least one workable problem. We agreed that the
only problem anyone would be willing to work on with him was
how to keep him out of the hospital.
Identifying a problem we could work on together opened
up a way for us to work as allies rather than adversaries. After
his parents left, I briefly met with Matt and Dr. Greene and
said: “Well you know it’s your choice, Matt. You know what I
think, and I can’t force you to do something you don’t believe
in. I wouldn’t want to do that even if I could, unless, of course,

96 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

you were in danger, which you’re not in right now. I respect
your right to make this decision for yourself. I know you told Dr.
Greene and your parents that you would stay on the medicine.
But if you change your mind, and if I had to guess I’d guess you
will since you don’t believe you’re sick, I hope you will pay close
attention to what happens next. It’s your life. Don’t just have an
opinion about the medication—prove to yourself whether your
opinion is right or wrong.”
“I already said I’d take the pills!” he responded defensively,
probably because I was implying that I didn’t believe the
reassurances he’d given Dr. Greene and his parents.
“Okay, I will take you at your word. But I have to say that
if it were me, I wouldn’t take the medicine.” Seeing that Brian
looked mortified by what I had just said, I asked him, “Dr.
Greene, do you have something to say? You look like you might
have a different view on this.”
“Well, I don’t think you really meant that if you were in
Matt’s shoes you wouldn’t take the medicine.”
“That’s exactly what I meant.” Brian frowned and seemed
to be searching for words when Matt saved him by asking me,
“So, you don’t think I need the drugs?”
“I didn’t say that. What I said is that if I were you, I wouldn’t
take them after I leave the hospital. Matt, you don’t believe you
have a mental illness and you feel strongly you shouldn’t be
taking medicine for an illness you don’t have. That sounds like
common sense to me. Who would take pills if they didn’t think
they needed them? What would be the point? If I believed those
things I wouldn’t be planning on taking the medicine when
people were no longer looking over my shoulder. If I were in
your shoes, I would say what it took to get out of here and then
follow my own compass. Isn’t that really where you are? You
can tell me and you will still go home today. It won’t change a
thing.”

LISTEN ▪ 97

“I would never do that,” Matt said facetiously, a smile
spreading across his face. I smiled back as we both recognized
and shared the truth of what he would do once the door closed
behind him.
“Hypothetically then, if you do stop taking the medicine, ask
yourself these three questions: What stays the same? What gets
worse? What gets better? Write it down like we’ve been doing
while you were here. You know what I mean?”
“Yeah. The pluses and minuses.”
“Exactly. So you know what I’m talking about?”
“Yeah. It’s my life. I hold the key and it’s up to me to decide.”
“Right. Now, you’ve decided you really don’t want to take
the medicine, right?”
“Yeah,” he admitted sheepishly. “But I will anyway.
Everyone wants me to, so I will.”
“Well, I don’t know if everyone wants you to, but you know
my opinion. I hope that you will. But if you decide to stop, I want
you to know I respect that this is your life and your right.”
“Yeah, but you’ll think I’m stupid.”
“No, I won’t. But I might think you made a bad decision if
you made an uninformed decision.”
“You’re the doctor, you would know.”
“That’s not what I meant. You are in the best position to be the
expert on this issue. Be a scientist. Think of this as an experiment.
Collect the data. Don’t jump to conclusions one way or the other.
Just pay attention to what happens when you’re not taking the
medicine. Ask people you trust how you seem when you’re off
medicine. Think you’d be interested in doing that?”
“I don’t know. I already know the answer.”
“Well, it seems everyone else already thinks they know the
answer, too, and most of them disagree with you. Here’s your
chance to prove them wrong.”
“I’ll try to keep an open mind.”

98 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

“That’s all I’m suggesting. Anything else you want to talk
about before we stop? Any feedback for me?”
“No, I guess not.”
“Well, good luck.” I stood up, extended my hand, and added,
“I hope I never see you again.”
“Same here,” Matt replied. We both laughed as we shook
hands. If I saw Matt, it would be because he was back in the
hospital. Keeping him out of the hospital and in his life was
something we both wholeheartedly agreed upon.
7. Did They Write the Headlines?
No one appeared to pay attention to the headlines, much
less write them down. Of course, writing down what Matt had
to say would have been awkward in this situation because his
doctor and parents had never practiced this technique with him.
It’s true that Brian often took notes during their sessions, but
they were almost entirely about symptoms he was observing. He
rarely recorded Matt’s subjective experience of the problem (his
parents, the police, and the “shrinks”) or statements that revealed
what was important to him, what motivated him (staying out of
the hospital, getting a job and a place of his own). But it would
have been easy to ask, “Is it all right with you if I write down
what you’re telling us is most important to you?”

Effective Listening
Dr. Ivan Kohut, a third-year resident in psychiatry, was
meeting with Vicky, the 45-year-old woman with manic
depression you heard about in Chapter 2. Her husband Scott was
also present. Vicky had spent the last two weeks in the hospital
following a manic episode during which she took her two children
on a three-day “road trip” to Mount Desert Island National Park
in Maine.

LISTEN ▪ 99

The first night of the trip was especially disturbing because
Scott had no idea where his family had gone until Vicky called
him at 11:00 p.m. to explain that she wanted their children to
experience the same spiritual awakening she was having. God
had instructed her to take them to the top of Cadillac Mountain
because it was the highest point on the East coast, and had told
her that once they were there, he would come to them.
Having gone through two previous manic episodes with
Vicky over the course of their marriage, Scott figured out what
was happening much more quickly than he had in the past. During
the phone call, he begged her to come home, but she refused, and
when he told her he thought she was becoming sick, she abruptly
hung up the phone. Scott immediately called the police in the area
she had phoned from, but they told him there wasn’t much they
could do except to “keep an eye out for her car.” They suggested
he call the National Park Headquarters in Maine.
With the help of Vicky’s psychiatrist, Scott was able to
convince the park rangers to intercept his wife when she arrived.
He then flew up to Maine, and after much cajoling and threats of
commitment, he got her agreement to return to New York and go
to the hospital.
From both Scott’s and Vicky’s perspective the drive back
was nightmarish. The children, as children often do, were
unconsciously running interference by misbehaving. Their
fights and tantrums, together with Vicky’s rapid-fire speech and
grandiose proclamations, made for an excruciatingly long drive
home.
After greeting the couple, Ivan sat down and began by
asking, “What would the two of you like to talk about today? I
have two things I’d like to put on our agenda. How about you,
Vicky?”
“When do I get out of here? That’s the only thing I’d like to
talk about.”

100 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

“Okay. Scott, how about you?”
“Well, I have the same question. And I also want to talk
about her medications.”
“Anything else? Either of you?”
“No,” Vicky answered quickly.
Scott thought a minute, then said, “I suppose not. Maybe
more will occur to me as we talk.”
“Good. My two agenda items are similar,” said Ivan. “I
want to report on how I think Vicky is doing and then ask her
how she feels about the discharge plan. So that’s basically three
items: One, when does Vicky get out of here; two, my view on
how she’s doing, and three, Vicky’s opinion of the plan we put
together for after she leaves. If it’s okay with the two of you, I’d
like to get the second item out of the way first.”
Vicky and Scott both nodded their approval.
Addressing Vicky, Ivan said, “I think you are doing much
better than when we first met two weeks ago. Back then you
were sleeping about two to four hours a night, your thoughts
were racing, your speech was pressured, you were euphoric,
extremely irritable, and you had some unusual thoughts about
God and supernatural abilities you felt he had given you. Right
now your sleep is back to normal, your thoughts aren’t racing,
and your speech isn’t pressured. You don’t need me to describe
your mood. How would you describe your mood over the last
week?”
“Kind of constricted. I’m not as happy and I don’t get
irritated so easily. I’m not depressed.”
“Do you miss the happy feeling?”
“You know I do, Dr. Kohut! Wouldn’t you?”
“Absolutely.” Noting the smile on her face, he added,
“But it looks to me like you can still feel happy. It’s the extreme
happiness, the high, that’s gone. Yes?”
“That’s true,” she answered.

LISTEN ▪ 101

“So, in a nutshell, I think you’re ready to go home the day
after tomorrow.”
Vicky looked surprised. “Why didn’t you tell me that this
morning when we met?”
“I suppose you don’t remember, but I told you I had to
discuss it with the team first. I wanted everyone’s input. We
generally make these decisions by consensus, and the consensus
is that you’re much improved and can go home. Scott, any opinion
about this?”
“Not really. I expected it. I see that she’s getting back to
normal. But I guess I’m not clear on what happens next. What
can we do to keep this from happening again?”
“Good segue to the last item on our agenda—what happens
next with respect to your treatment.” Ivan addressed Vicky once
again. “I’d like to see you in the clinic once a week for the next
couple of months, and then maybe drop down to once a month.
I don’t want to change anything about the medication you’re
taking right now. I’d like to see how you do over the next couple
of weeks, then re-evaluate and discuss if we should make any
adjustments. What are your thoughts about what should happen
next?”
Vicky laughed and asked, “Does it really matter? Everyone
thinks I should stay on medication.”
“Of course, it matters!” Scott replied, a little irritated and
defensive.
“You’re the boss here, even if it doesn’t seem that way now,”
Ivan added.
“What are you talking about?” asked Vicky.
“I am talking about the fact that what your husband and I
think you should do doesn’t amount to a hill of beans compared to
what you think you should do. If you believe that the medications
have done their job and want to stop taking them, you will. I can’t
stop you and neither can your husband.”

102 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

“Then why am I here? I don’t feel like the boss.”
“That’s because you lost a lot of control when the bipolar
disorder you have flared up. It caused you to do things that
worried a lot of people and motivated them to take control away
from you. But now you’ve got the illness under control again and
you’re back in the driver’s seat.”
“If that’s true, then I don’t want to take these drugs for more
than a month or two.”
“So, if I understand you, you don’t want to take these drugs
for more than two months at the most. Right?”
“Yes.”
Scott interrupted. “Wait a minute! That’s how she got into
this mess in the first place. Every doctor she’s seen, including you,
has told us she will very likely have to stay on these medications
for the rest of her life.”
“If she doesn’t want to have another flare-up, yes, that’s true.
That is my opinion. Also, the medications will help to keep her
from becoming depressed again. I’m not contradicting myself.
I’m saying something else. It’s Vicky’s choice, not yours or mine.
But the choices you make,” he added, looking at Vicky, “will have
consequences.”
“You make it sound so ominous,” she replied.
“I think the consequences of stopping your treatment will be
very negative. You know what my professional recommendation is
and what your last psychiatrist felt. You know what your husband
and your family would like. But what you believe is what you will
ultimately do. And I have to respect that. But I am curious about
one thing. Why don’t you think you will need the medications?
Just this morning you told me they’ve been very helpful over the
past few weeks. Were you just ‘yessing’ me or did you really mean
it?”
“I meant it. They’ve done their job. But I’m better now.”
“So you see yourself as cured of bipolar disorder.”

LISTEN ▪ 103

“Well, I’m not sure I have manic depression. But whatever
was going on, yes, the medications helped calm me down. So,
yes, the problem is solved. Why would I want to be on these
drugs for the rest of my life when the problem doesn’t exist
anymore?”
“So what you’re saying,” Ivan began, “is that you had some
kind of problem, not manic depression, that the drugs helped
you with. And now that the problem is solved, you don’t want
to keep taking the medication. Right?”
“Right.”
“Want my opinion on what you just said?”
“I already know it.”
“Actually, it may surprise you.”
“Shoot.”
“What you propose is certainly possible,” Ivan said to
the couples’ surprise. “How about we make a deal. If you
decide, six months from now, that you still want to go off your
medications, we can give it a try. But I won’t have any part of it
if we’re not meeting regularly.”
“Why would you do that? You already told me you think I
have to stay on these medications forever.”
“Because your opinion is the only one that ultimately
determines whether or not you stay in treatment. I am willing
to work with you to prove what you believe even though I
don’t believe it. I have only two requirements: that you see me
regularly, and that you keep a daily diary during the time we’re
lowering your dosages.”
“Why a diary?”
“So you have a record of how you were thinking and acting
during the time your medication was lowered. It will also help
you to pay attention to the consequences, not only for you but
for your family.”
“I would be willing to do that,” Vicky replied.

104 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

“Okay, then let’s write the deal down so we all remember.
You will stay on the medications for another six months. If
at that time you still want to discontinue the drugs, we do it
together,” he said aloud as he wrote down his words. Then he
added as an afterthought, “I’d like to include Scott in some of
those meetings as well if that’s okay.”
“Sure,” she answered.
“And if we go that route, you will keep a daily diary. We
can talk more about what I’d like you to record—cross that
bridge when we come to it. Do I have it right? Is this what we
agreed to?”
“Yes,” both Vicky and Scott replied.
1. Did They Make It Safe?
Did Ivan make it safe for Vicky to talk? Yes. He made it clear
that he wanted to hear Vicky’s views on the treatment and was
actually reluctant to tell her his views, which she already knew.
She understood she could talk about her belief that she was not
sick and didn’t need medicine without her doctor contradicting
her. She also knew that Ivan would keep her husband from
jumping down her throat. Ivan made it clear that her opinion
was the only one that really mattered at the moment. It was
more important than his and Scott’s opinion.
2. Did They Know Their Fears?
Scott got nervous and went on the attack for a moment
when Ivan acknowledged, without argument, Vicky’s desire
to stop taking the medicine. Otherwise, Scott did a great job
of listening passively as his wife and doctor discussed her
views on the problem and what she needed. In previous
meetings, Ivan had worked with Scott to help him recognize
where he was powerless and where he had power. Where
he was powerless was in convincing his wife she had manic-

LISTEN ▪ 105

depression and needed to be on medication for the rest of her
life. He hadn’t succeeded in four years, and Ivan helped him
to recognize what was obvious—he wasn’t going to suddenly
succeed now by continuing the argument. Where he had power
was in repairing their relationship so that she would feel he was
once again her ally, on her team, and that they were working on
the same problems together.
Ivan was clear about his fears and understood that he
had nothing to lose by listening to Vicky’s views. He knew
he would not harm her by allowing her to be honest, by not
contradicting her views without her permission (he always
asked her if he could give his opinion before he gave it), and by
actively listening.
3. Did They Stop Pushing Their Agenda?
Not only did they agree on an agenda, but over the course
of their conversation Ivan repeatedly checked back with
Vicky and her husband to ensure that there wasn’t anything
else either of them wanted to talk about. The main agenda
was understanding Vicky’s views and working with how she
experienced all this.
4. Did They Let it Be?
Ivan did not react emotionally to Vicky’s statement that
she wanted to stop taking medication. Neither did Scott, except
during the one brief moment when his fears caught him off
guard. Neither Ivan nor Scott jumped in with their opinions to
refute Vicky’s statement that she was no longer ill and planned
to stop taking the medication. They let her opinions stand. They
respected her point of view. When Ivan did offer his opinion, he
empowered Vicky by first asking if it was okay with her for him
to tell her what he thought.

106 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

5. Did They Respect What They Heard?
Ivan did this repeatedly, often rephrasing things Vicky had
said to ensure that he “got it right.” He prefaced his reflective
statements by indicating that he just wanted to be sure he
understood her correctly (“Let me see if I got this right?”), used
her words without comment or criticism, and then asked her if
he’d understood correctly. He acknowledged that he understood
and genuinely respected her point of view.
6. Did They Find Workable Problems?
Vicky felt that the medications were a short-term treatment,
like antibiotics for an infection, rather than a long-term treatment,
like insulin for diabetes. The good news is that Vicky had some
insight, though nowhere near as much as her family and doctor
would have liked. She understood that the drugs helped her when
she had symptoms but didn’t understand that the drugs could
prevent the symptoms from returning when she was feeling well.
Although Ivan understood that statistically it was highly
unlikely she could stop without getting sick again, there was a
very, very small chance that she could. He also understood that
until the day Vicky “owned” the treatment, until she found a
reason that made sense to her to stay on the medicine, she never
would. Her problem, which he was willing to help her with for
the time being, was taking the medicine. But he would work with
her on this only if she stayed in therapy with him, allowed Scott to
come to some of the sessions, and took responsibility for tracking
what happened when she stopped taking the medicine.
By agreeing to work with her on the problem as she defined it,
he kept her in therapy and on the medication for a longer period
of time than if he had insisted the treatment was “a life sentence,”
as she had once described it. He also laid the foundation for her
discovering reasons to continue in treatment.

LISTEN ▪ 107

7. Did They Write the Headlines?
Ivan not only wrote down what they had agreed to do about
the medications but asked permission to do so before starting. This
was important because it emphasized Ivan’s wish to collaborate
rather than pontificate. By asking, he also underscored that Vicky
would be in charge after she left the hospital. He wasn’t afraid to
acknowledge his own powerlessness.
By doing that, he reminded Vicky that the choice to continue
treatment was hers, as was the responsibility for the consequences
that would follow her decision. The “headlines” were that she
wanted off the medications and that she understood they helped
her when her thoughts were racing, when she wasn’t sleeping,
and when she got tired out (these were the things she saw as
problems even though she didn’t think she had an illness).
In summary, listening is an active process. It involves asking
many questions and not reacting to what you are hearing. You
should think of yourself as a scientist trying to unravel a mystery.
Your task is to gain a clear idea of what your loved one’s experience
of the illness and treatment is. Once you know how he experiences
the idea of having a mental illness and taking psychiatric drugs,
you will have acquired vital knowledge you need in order to
build a treatment agreement.
The Danger of Listening Reflectively
Very likely, the person you are listening to reflectively
and without judgment will make the mistake of thinking you
believe what he is telling you (about not being sick, not needing
medications, or the CIA conspiracy). He may ask you to help him
catch the CIA in the act or talk to his parents so he can go off
medications since you seem to agree he doesn’t need them.
I touch on this problem at various points in this book—it’s
why most people are afraid of reflective listening—but let me

108 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

introduce you to two new tools: The Delaying Tool and the Three
A’s For Giving Your Opinion that will allow you to use reflective
listening without falling prey to these traps. I will talk about these
both again later, but let me lay it out for you here concisely.
The Delaying Tool
You want to delay giving your opinion about controversial
topics (delusions, desire to not take medicine, etc.) for as long as
possible to preserve the alliance you are building, delay the hurt
your answer will cause, and perhaps most importantly, shift the
locus of control to the person who is asking for your opinion.
After all, when you give it, he has no one to blame for hearing
your point of view but himself, especially if you have delayed
giving it because you have been genuinely reluctant to do so.
So, in terms of learning to LEAP, the longer you are able
to delay giving your opinion, the more the other person will
have experienced you as respecting his and, therefore, the more
obligated he will feel to respect yours (or at least hear you out).
If he has to solicit it, the more in control he will feel and the less
defensive he will be when he hears it. The harder he has to work
for it, the more it will matter when you finally do give it. For these
three reasons, your opinion will have more weight.
When you delay, try the following: first honor the question
by promising to answer, attempt to change the topic and ask
permission to do so. Here are some examples that include all
three elements (the promise, the diversion and the request for
permission to change the topic):
•

I promise I’ll tell you whether I think you are sick. But first, if
it’s OK with you, I would like to hear more about _________.
Would that be all right?

LISTEN ▪ 109

•

•

•

I will answer your question about the CIA. Can I ask you to
give me some more details about what happened last night
first? Would that be OK?
You’ve asked me many times whether I think you’re delusional.
I promise to answer, but if it’s OK with you, before I tell you
what I see, could you tell me more about __________?
I promise to answer your question about whether you should
stop taking medicine. Before I do, I want you to know that I
think your opinion about this is far more important than mine.
So can you tell me all the reasons why you want to do that?

The “A” Tools for Giving your Opinion
Sometimes, even after you’ve listened and empathized, the
other person won’t ask you what you think. This is rare in my
experience, and if it happens to you, I want you to consider two
possibilities. One is that you have not used the tools you’ve learned
as effectively as you could…and the other is that the person likes
talking so much that he simply isn’t interested in what you have
to say. If it’s the latter, you can ask if he or she would be interested
in hearing your perspective. You can say something like, “After
listening to you, I have a much better picture of your views on this.
Can I tell you what I think?”
I’ve never heard of anyone who has used the listening and
empathy tools receiving a “no” in answer to this question, and I
don’t believe you will either. But whether you have been asked for
your opinion repeatedly and delayed giving it, or you have had to
offer it because the person doesn’t ask, despite being cooled down
and feeling listened to and respected, the way you deliver your
opinion will determine whether it throws more fuel on the fire or
continues to douse the flames. If you want to get past the impasse,
there are three new tools you now need to add to your tool belt. I
often use all three of them together, but sometimes you need only
one or two to get the job done. I call these my “A” tools—it makes

110 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

them easier to remember and they are powerful tools you can
use whenever you’re arguing or negotiating. I like to think of
these tools as soft, like felt or a goose-down pillow. Sometimes
I think of them as airbags. In other words, they are tools that
help to soften the blow and save lives—or at least relationships.
The “three A’s” are apologize, acknowledge, and agree.
APOLOGIZE
Apologizing may be the last thing you think you need or
want to do at this point. After all, the other person has been
asking you (probably more than once) what you think. You’re
only doing what she’s asked. In fact, you may think that if you
need to apologize for anything it would be for having delayed
so long—but that’s not the way it works.
Keep in mind the reason you delayed in the first place:
because you’re aware that when you do give your opinion, it’s
likely to damage the trust you’ve so carefully been building.
When you finally admit that you still don’t agree, the other
person is likely to be disappointed, to feel somehow betrayed,
and to get angry all over again. So what you need to indicate is
that you understand all this and apologize, because you do truly
wish what you believe didn’t make her feel that way.
I’m not suggesting you apologize for the opinion you’re
about to offer (e.g., “Yes I think you may have bipolar
disorder…”), but for the feelings it might engender. You’re not
saying you’re sorry you feel this way, but rather that you’re
sorry that what you have to say may make him or her feel upset.
What you might say is something like, “Before I tell you what I
think about this, I want to apologize because what I think might
feel hurtful or disappointing.”
Understanding that difference ought to make the process
easier for you. If you still feel unable to apologize, you’re
probably still too angry, and you need to take a few deep

LISTEN ▪ 111

breaths, step back—if only for a moment—and think about why
you’re doing this in the first place.
When you do apologize, just be sure that you don’t use the
word “but,” as in, “I apologize if this is going to upset you, but,
I think…” I mentioned this before but want to emphasize it here
again because it is so important.
People who are in a disagreement typically stop listening
when they hear the word “but.” It’s as if you had pushed a
button on a remote control and shut off their hearing aid. Not
only are they incapable of hearing you—but the most likely
outcome is that you’ll just revert to “butting” heads all over
again.
ACKNOWLEDGE
What is it that you need to acknowledge? Certainly not
that you still think you’re right (although, ultimately, that’s
more or less what you’re going to be saying). Rather, you need
to acknowledge that you’re not infallible and you might be
wrong—even though you clearly don’t think so. (And you’re not
going to say that!) So, after you apologize, say something like,
“Also, I could be wrong about this. I don’t know everything.”
When you do that, you are, first of all, indicating that
you are flexible. If you can be flexible, you’re more likely to
trigger some flexibility in the other person. If you’re rigid and
dogmatic, you’re equally likely to trigger that. Remember that
LEAP is all about giving in order to get.
Acknowledging that you could possibly be wrong is also
a way to convey respect because you are not insisting that you
are wise and the other person is ignorant. It’s the same principle
Benjamin Franklin wrote about in his autobiography:
“I made it a rule to forbear all direct contradiction to the sentiment
of others, and all positive assertion of my own. I even forbade myself

112 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

the use of every word or expression in the language that imported a fix’d
opinion...for these fifty years past no one has ever heard a dogmatical
expression escape me.”
If it worked for Benjamin Franklin, who broke many
seemingly insurmountable impasses, it can work for you.
AGREE
I’ve already said that you’re not going to be agreeing with
the other person’s opinion. So what is this about?
Here, you’re going to ask her to agree that you disagree. In
other words, you’ll be indicating that you respect her opinion
and hope that she’ll respect yours. “I hope we can just agree to
disagree on this. I respect your point of view and I won’t try to
talk you out of it. I hope you can respect mine.”

Using the “three A’s” is far easier than it might appear at
first glance. When my brother Henry asked me if I thought he
had schizophrenia, I said: “I’m sorry because this might hurt
your feelings. I want you to know I could be wrong. I don’t know
everything, but yes, I think you might have schizophrenia. I hope
we don’t have to argue about this—I respect your opinion on this
and I hope you respect mine. Let’s just disagree on this.”
Did you see any or all of the “three A’s”?
Here is a shorter example. “Should you take the medicine?
I’m sorry I feel this way and I could be wrong, I just hope we can
agree to disagree on this. Yes, I think you ought to try it for at
least a few months and see how it goes.”
The point is to be genuinely humble, help the person save face,
and preserve the relationship you’ve been building. Remember,
you will win on the strength of your relationship rather than on
the strength of your argument.

7
Empathize

A

few years after he first became ill, my brother and I were
talking about one of his medications, Haldol. He hated
Haldol (a.k.a. haloperidol) because it made him feel “stiff”
and “groggy.” As I listened to his complaints, I understood for
the first time some of the frustration he felt about taking these
medications. I recall saying something along the lines of, “I can
see why you don’t like these drugs. They make you feel stiff and
groggy.” The conversation stands out in my mind because for
the first time, we were calmly talking about the medication and
listening to one another, instead of arguing.
Usually our conversations on this topic were a disaster. I
would hold my ground and pontificate about why he should take
the medications prescribed for him and about how immature it
was of him not to accept the fact that he was ill. Brothers can
often be that way, but after working for a year as a therapy aide
on an inpatient psychiatric ward, I was beginning to learn how
important it was to listen. As I listened, I couldn’t help beginning
to empathize. I loved Henry, and when someone you love is in
pain, it’s hard not to empathize. Learning to listen led to empathy.
And my empathy ultimately resulted in my brother showing a
real interest in my thoughts about the illness he felt he did not have
and the medications he was sure he did not need.
These are among the most important feelings to connect
with because they are the feelings that drive people with mental
illness away from their loved ones and therapists.

113

114 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

When you feel empathy and convey it, your loved one will
likely feel understood and respected. When you convey that you
understand how your loved one is feeling, his or her defensiveness
will decrease and openness to your opinion will increase. If you
have listened reflectively to your loved one’s experience of his
illness and the prescribed treatment, you will naturally begin to
empathize.
Communicating empathy can be tricky when you’re talking
to someone who has a psychotic illness, however. Many people
worry that they should not empathize with certain feelings, such
as anger about being forced to take medicine, fear of treatment,
or feelings connected to delusions when, in fact, these are among
the most important feelings to connect with—because they are
the feelings that drive people with mental illness away from their
loved ones and therapists.
Conveying empathy
You must first learn what it is you should be empathizing
with. The short answer is “any feeling your loved one is willing
to reveal.” But there are certain feelings that are particularly
important for you to understand. Whether they are rational (“I
am so tired of everybody telling me I am sick!”) or irrational (“The
C.I.A. has implanted microchips in the capsules so they can track
me!”), you want to be sure to empathize with:
• Frustrations (about pressure from others to take medication
and about personal goals that have not been met).
• Fears (about medication, being stigmatized, and failing).
• Discomfort (attributed to medications, such as gaining
weight or feeling groggy, slowed down, less creative, stiff,
etc.).
• Desires (to work, get married, have children, return to
school, stay out of the hospital, etc.).

EMPATHIZE ▪ 115

A magical thing happens when you combine reflective
listening with empathy. Your loved one will ask you what you
think! I can almost guarantee this will happen.
For example, remember the conversation I had with Matt
and his doctor? Matt, who everyone knew didn’t think he was
mentally ill, had just insincerely promised to take his medicine
when he left the hospital. And I said, “Okay. I will take you at
your word. But I have to say that if it were me, I wouldn’t take
the medicine.” He opened up to me then and was more honest
about not wanting to take the drugs. When he did that, I focused
on empathizing with his feelings about taking them. I said, “You
sound angry that everyone is pushing these drugs on you. Are
you?” He agreed, then eventually asked me, “So, you don’t think
I need the drugs?”
You saw my answer to that question, but what you didn’t
know was that the time was ripe for me to give him my opinion.
He was about to leave the hospital, and it was my last chance
to talk with him. Most of the time, however, when someone
asks my opinion about a delusion, about whether I think he’s
mentally ill or needs medications, I delay answering.
For example, one patient was convinced that his mother was
poisoning his food. I listened and empathized, and he then asked
me if I believed it was actually happening. Our conversation
about this began with my saying, “So, if I understand you
correctly, you mother has been poisoning your food. Do I have
that right?”
“Yes!”
“How do you feel about that?”
“Are you serious? How would you feel?”
“I would feel, and I think anyone would feel, scared and
angry,” I replied.
“So, do you believe it? Are you going to do something about
it?” he asked.

116 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

I didn’t answer his questions at that point, although I did
later. I delayed answering as long as I could. I will get to the
reasons for that and explain how you can delay answering without
frustrating the questioner. For now, however, the take home point
is: Listen and empathize and you will be asked your opinion. And that
is ultimately what you want to have happen—because an opinion
that has been asked for carries far more weight than one that is
forced on a person who is arguing with you.
Dolores
Dolores, who has had schizophrenia for nearly 20 years, told
me that she didn’t need medication or a day treatment program
because there was nothing wrong with her. What did Dolores feel
she needed? More than anything else, she wanted a job. She was
frustrated that she did not have a job and also with her family,
who told her she couldn’t work. Her family was being reasonably
pessimistic. The fact is that Dolores had been unable to keep a job
for more than a few days at a time and she had been employed
only a handful of times over the past twenty years.
By the time I met her, Dolores, like many individuals with
serious mental illness who don’t know they’re ill, had been
hospitalized many times—in her case, two to four times per year.
Although she almost always signed herself into the hospital
voluntarily, she would do this only after receiving tremendous
pressure from her family. When I talked with her about what she
planned to do when she left the hospital this time, she told me
simply, “Get a job.”
If you were her therapist and discussing her plans, you
might be tempted (as I was early in my career) to focus on the
irrationality of the idea. After all, she had a long history of poor
adherence to her medication regimen—there was no reason to
believe that her longstanding pattern of unemployment was about
to change. You might understandably think that talking about

EMPATHIZE ▪ 117

her reluctance to stay in treatment would be more beneficial than
encouraging or agreeing with her irrational plan for herself. The
problem was that Dolores had absolutely no interest in talking
about drugs, day treatment programs, or doctors’ appointments.
Would you want to talk about those things if you weren’t ill?
So, instead of going that route, I began our talk about her
plans for the future by empathizing with what she was feeling at
that moment. “You want to get a job when you leave?”
“I’m going to work on Wall Street,” she answered quickly.
“Why Wall Street?” I asked, ignoring how far-fetched her
plan was.
“I want to make a lot of money. I need to have my own
money.”
I reflected her statement back to her. “It’s important to you to
have your own money and you can do that by working on Wall
Street. Is that right?”
“Yes, I hate having to ask my family for money.”
“How come?”
“It makes me feel like a child. My little sister [who was in her
30’s at the time] is a stockbroker and you should see her house.
I’m the big sister. I should be making money too!”
I checked to see if I understood her feelings and, at the same
time, communicated my empathy. “It sounds like asking for
money makes you feel embarrassed or even a little humiliated.
Am I right about that?”
“It does. Wouldn’t you be embarrassed?” she asked.
“Yes, I think I probably would feel that way.” Sensing an
opening, I added, “Can I ask you something?”
“What?”
Careful not to add to her humiliation and raise her defenses,
I asked, “Why do you think you haven’t worked very much?”
(Note that I didn’t ask, “Why is it you’ve only worked about
twelve days in your entire adult life?”)

118 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

She quickly answered, “Because I’m always in the damn
hospital!”
“Is being in the hospital keeping you from work?”
“I’m angry about being in the hospital so much. I want to get
on with my life and I can’t if I’m in a damn hospital.”
“So it’s much more than frustration you feel. It makes you
angry. Yes?” I asked, nodding my head.
“Very angry,” she answered, more calmly this time.
Pushing ahead, I asked, “How do you feel about the fact that
it’s been hard to find work?”
“Sometimes I want to scream!”
“That sounds infuriating. Is it?”
“No. It’s frustrating,” she said, correcting my misperception.
“So it’s frustrating. Sorry I got that wrong.”
“That’s okay.”
During this brief exchange, I empathized with Dolores’s
feelings of humiliation, her deep desire to work, and her frustration
with being unable to work. Did you notice that nearly everything
I said was in the form of a question? That is how you should
do reflective listening. Also, by making a statement about my
understanding of her feelings and asking if I had it right, I was
able to make sure I understood what she meant when she said
she wanted to scream. I communicated my empathy for what she
was feeling and allowed her to be in control of the conversation.
Also, by asking questions instead of commenting on what
she had to say (e.g., “What you’re planning isn’t realistic…”), I
learned what was important to Dolores, what was uppermost
on her mind, and how she was feeling. I created a window of
opportunity, which I later used to discuss what role, if any, she
felt treatment might play in what she wanted to accomplish (i.e.,
staying out of the hospital and working on Wall Street).
Whenever you want to facilitate change in another person,
you must first become his friend (i.e., someone he trusts).

EMPATHIZE ▪ 119

Whenever you convey empathy for another person’s experience,
he feels understood, respected, and more trusting. Because you
understand the other person’s point of view and how he feels
about his situation, there is nothing to argue about. Consequently,
he becomes less defensive and more open to hearing your
perspective. And, more often than not, he will ask either: “So do
you believe me?” Or, “Why are you acting like you believe me?
You don’t believe me, do you?”
These questions are opposite sides of the same coin—a coin
you want to handle carefully as it is vital to where you want to go.
How to handle the “Do you agree with me?” question
Delay answering questions about delusions, having a mental
illness, or the need for medication as long as you can. There are
two reasons to do this—so that you preserve and build on the
good relationship you have been creating with reflective listening
and empathy. Up to this point, the person feels that his or her
opinion is respected and honored. In fact, he feels so certain of
your respect for his opinion that he has made the mistake of
thinking you probably agree with him. Therefore, when you do
give your opinion, it will probably hurt and make the person
defensive.
The longer you wait, the more experiences he will have of
your listening to him without disagreeing or essentially telling
him he’s “crazy,” which is just how many persons with mental
illness will hear your opinion unless you pay close attention to
how you give it.
The second reason to delay has to do with the two ways one
can give an opinion. I mentioned them in the previous chapter.
By making the person ask for your opinion, you make him
responsible for having to hear it.
Think about it. If you asked me over and over again whether
I thought you were mentally ill and needed medication, and I

120 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

didn’t seem very eager to tell you, you’d have no one to blame but
yourself for having coerced me into giving it. Try to remember:
• Only give your opinion when it has been asked for.
• An opinion that has been asked for carries more weight
than an unsolicited opinion.
• It is important to avoid or delay giving your opinion.
So, how can you delay giving your opinion on these matters
that are so important to your loved one? In the space below, I
want you to write down something you could say to delay giving
your opinion on the question, “Do you think I am mentally ill and
need to take medicine?”

Read what you wrote and imagine it was being said to you.
How would you feel about it?
The trick to delaying is first to honor the question by
promising to answer it. By doing that, you empower the person
by asking his permission to delay answering and you make
the point that his opinion is more important than yours. It is not as
complicated as it sounds. Here are some examples:
• “I promise I will answer your question, but, if it’s okay
with you, I want to wait and listen to you some more
first, okay?”

EMPATHIZE ▪ 121

• “I will tell you, but I would rather keep listening to your
views on this because I am learning a lot about you I
didn’t know. Can I tell you later what I think?”
• “You know, your opinion is the most important opinion
in this room, not mine. I would like to learn more before
I tell you what I think, if that’s all right with you.”
I once had a patient say to me, “But you’re the doctor! Your
opinion has got to be more important than mine.” I disagreed
and I told him so. “When we’re done talking and you walk out
this door, you are in the driver’s seat. Your opinion is what will
determine what you do and where you go, the choices you make,
not mine. So you’re opinion is far more important than mine.”
By saying this, I was empowering him while humbling
myself. More important, it was coming from my heart. I believed
it. As you can imagine, this made me and my opinion a lot less
threatening to him than I or it would have been otherwise.
When you feel the time is right, you want to give your opinion.
At some point, when you feel the time is right, you want to
give your opinion. Earlier in the book, I told you about the research
that indicates how a special kind of relationship can influence
someone’s willingness to take medicine. That relationship is one
in which the mentally ill person feels that his opinion is respected,
trusts the other person, and believes that this other person thinks
taking medicine is a very good idea. Well, now is your chance to
give your opinion. But, for the same reasons you delayed giving
it, do it with humility while empowering your loved one. Never
give your opinion without first using what I named the “three
A’s.” I described them earlier, but they are so important. Many
readers tell me they missed them when reading this book, so I list
them here again:

122 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

Apologize — “Before I tell you what I think about this, I want
to apologize because it might feel hurtful or disappointing.”  
Acknowledge fallibility — “Also, I could be wrong. I don’t
think I am, but I might be.”
Agree to disagree — “And, I hope that we can just agree to
disagree on this. I respect your point of view and I will not try
and talk you out of it. I hope you can respect mine.”
This, too, comes quite easily once you practice it a few times.
Try it out with someone in a role-play before using it with your
loved one. Practice it in other situations. It will disarm the person
you are about to disagree with when you say something like,
“I am sorry because my answer might upset you and I realize
I could be wrong. I just hope we can agree to disagree. I think
_________________.” Don’t use the word “but” as in, “But, I
think…” People who are in a disagreement typically stop listening
when they hear the word “but.”
If your loved one gets defensive after you give your opinion,
don’t argue. Just apologize for disagreeing. You might even say
something like, “I wish I felt differently so we didn’t have to
argue about this.” But I have found that, by the time I give my
opinion when using LEAP, I rarely encounter defensiveness.

15
The Surprise

I

’m sure you remember that one of the first things I told you,
way back at the beginning of this book, was that your goal was
not to get your loved one to admit he or she was sick but to get him
to follow his statement “I’m not sick” with the statement “But, I
could use some help.” In other words, the techniques I’ve been
teaching you are not aimed at getting the person who is mentally
ill to gain insight into being ill; they are directed specifically at
getting him to find reasons to accept treatment despite what he
believes.
If you’ve reached the point where your patient or loved one
has made that commitment, what you want to do now is make
sure you don’t revert to old bad habits like giving your opinion
without first asking if the other person wants to hear it. You
need to maintain and build on the collaborative dialogue you’ve
begun, and while you may be tempted to remind the mentally ill
person that “doctor knows best,” or even worse, “father knows
best,” you’ve got to remember that those so-called wise words
aren’t going to make one bit of difference to the one you’re trying
to help. In fact, they will more than likely just blow up the bridge
you’ve so carefully been building between you.
But you know all that already, right? So what’s the surprise?
The surprise is that when people with a serious mental illness
are in treatment and when they have the kind of relationship I’ve
been trying to help you build with them—one that allows them
to feel their point of view is respected and to trust you—they will
begin to develop insight.
Remember Vicky, whose interview with Dr. Kohut you read
in Chapter 6? Initially, Vicky continued to believe she was “cured”
195

196 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

of bipolar disorder but agreed to continue taking her lithium on
a trial basis for six months and then, if she decided to go off it, to
do so in conjunction with her doctor. She was able to make this
commitment because Dr. Kohut had allowed her to understand
that she was, ultimately, the one in charge of whether or not she
would take the medicine—by doing that, he won her trust and
showed her that he honored and respected her feelings. After a
while, Vicky was also able to see what happened when she lowered her dose or discontinued her medication, and she gained
true insight into the relationship between taking the medication
and remaining asymptomatic. When she recognized that without
the lithium she was getting “worn out” again, she asked to be put
back on medication.
And then there was Dolores, who kept losing jobs because
she was holding conversations aloud with the voices in her
head. At first, Dolores didn’t see any relationship between her
getting fired and going off her medication. In fact, she initially
believed that the medication was making her hear voices. It took
a long time, and several more hospitalizations, but Dolores did
gradually come to have some insight into the fact that when she
stopped taking medication she talked to herself more, and that
this was likely to make people think she was “nuts.” Like Vicky,
she developed insight into how medications helped her with a
problem she was having. Vicky didn’t call the problem “bipolar
disorder”; she called it getting “worn out.” Dolores’s problem, as
she saw it, wasn’t having hallucinations; it was talking aloud to
herself. Nevertheless, both these women developed insight into
how the medications helped them with their problems as they
saw them. The surprise, then, is that over time people do begin
to redefine their problems as mental illness, whether or not they
define mental illness in exactly the same way you do.
In psychology, we call this the “change paradox.” When
you stop pushing someone to change, often they find reasons to

THE SURPRISE ▪ 197

change all on their own. I think that is what happened not only
with Vicky and Dolores but also with other patients who have
benefited from the kind of relationship I’ve been talking about
while taking their medications. Given the room to explore their
situation with someone they trusted and who did not preach or
tell them they were sick, they were able to develop insight. First
the insight was about positive outcomes linked to taking medicine
and then later, into having a mental illness.
We know today, right now, that building a respectful and
trusting relationship is the key to helping someone with poor
insight accept treatment for mental illness.
I think the anecdotal evidence is pretty compelling, but there
are also scientific studies to show that developing the kinds of
relationships I’ve been talking about can and does ameliorate
lack of insight in patients with serious mental illness. In a study
by Dr. Roisen Kemp and her colleagues, published in the British
Journal of Psychiatry in 1998, the researchers found that medication
adherence and insight improved over an 18-month follow-up
period after only six sessions of MET. (Remember, LEAP is based
on MET, which seeks to create a collaborative relationship with
the person in “denial.”) This is one good example of how building
the mutually respectful and trusting relationships we have been
talking about can help with both adherence and insight. And,
as I mentioned in Chapter 10, new research on medication may
also help in our battle against anosognosia. Regardless of what
happens with the research on medication, however, we know
today—right now—that building a respectful and trusting
relationship is the key to helping someone with poor insight
accept treatment for mental illness.
Whether you are a family member or a mental health provider, what this means is that when you create a nonjudgmental

198 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

and trusting relationship, the person you are trying to help will
find reasons to be in treatment, and over time, develop insight
about having a mental illness. It may take a year or two of staying
in treatment, but the pay-off over a lifetime is incalculable.
As you go forward, however, you need to remember that you
are a member of the team. You need to be strong and well rested.
If you do more than you should, you will lose motivation and risk
“burnout.” Burnout is a term used by mental health professionals
to describe the feeling of complete exhaustion that comes from
having been immersed in other people’s problems for too long.
Exhausting yourself will only make you less effective and your
loved one or patient feel like a burden.
If you are a family member, I want to add one final word
from one family member to another. You are in a unique position
to help your loved one learn how to cope with mental illness. You
knew your loved one before the illness struck, which means that
you also know the core person who is often eclipsed by symptoms
of the disease. When someone who is seriously mentally ill feels
that you see him for who he is, and not just for the diagnosis he
has been given, he will be open to learning from you.
The Surprise for Henry and Xavier
Henry never developed insight into being mentally ill.
But the last time I saw him, in the days following our mother’s
funeral, I can’t tell you how much comfort I received from him—
it was more visceral than verbal. I know he felt the same. Yes,
we talked, but our shared battles, betrayals and ultimately our
reconciliation, made possible by our respect for each other, was
something we felt in our bones.
On the drive back to his house, on our last night together,
my brother told me he felt I saw him for who he was. Henry
was very kind, smart, funny, insightful (about most things), and
creative. Yes, he was a pain in the ass (and I to him) during the

THE SURPRISE ▪ 199

early years of his illness when we argued about whether or not
he was mentally ill and needed treatment. But I was to blame for
that more than he. Henry was able to laugh at life. I saw him and
liked him and he knew that.
I learned a lot from my brother—a man most people gave a
wide berth to because of his explosive eruptions into laughter for
no apparent reason and his conversations with the voices only he
heard. He taught me how to throw a baseball, ride a bicycle, and
the power of humility. When we were growing up, he brought
humor and magic into my life (like the time, when I was five,
that he convinced me I had just missed Santa Claus flying by
our window). More recently, he taught me about compassion,
patience, perseverance and most importantly, forgiveness. I feel
very fortunate, as you will read in the next section, that we had a
strong friendship for many years before he died.
LEAP would not exist if not for Henry Amador. It was not
my creation alone or that of my collaboration with Aaron (Tim)
Beck, M.D. and other colleagues and patients. More than anyone
else, Henry helped me to develop LEAP and without it, I am sure
we would have lost many years of closeness, laughter and love.
In the next, and last, section of this book I give you the details of where LEAP comes from theoretically, a summary of recent research on cognitive behavioral therapy for schizophrenia
(which LEAP draws on in part) and a review of recent research
on the link between violence and poor adherence. I next make an
argument for why we must include anosognosia in our diagnostic manual, not only for schizophrenia, but for other psychotic
disorders.
Finally, I tell you the end of Henry’s story. Perhaps “end”
is not the correct word because I believe that with every copy of
this book that is read, his story will continue to unfold—and his
compassion, empathy and kindness will help others reach people
with serious mental illness and bring them back to their families.

20
Henry

O

n April 23, 2007, while standing on a sidewalk and helping
a woman put her groceries on a bus, my brother Henry was
hit by a car and died at the scene. There’s a videotape of what
he did, taken by the bus company, though I don’t yet have the
strength to watch it.
That was so like him. Although often lost in delusional
thoughts and distracted by hallucinations, he was aware of
people around him, especially those in need, and he cared.
That was not what he or I had planned for. When I first
wrote about this, only two months after his death, I was much
too close to my loss and mourning to know what good could
possibly come from it all—but I had to trust that someday
something would.
Saying Goodbye Twice
Standing at the lectern, looking out at the people who had
come to Henry’s funeral, I was struck once again by what a full
life he had had. His friends filled the church, prompting several
of my family members—who had had very little contact with
Henry after he became ill 25 years before—to say things like “I
had no idea he had this many friends!” and “I never knew his
life was so full.”
As they met and spoke to more and more of his friends over
the course of that day and the next, some in my family expressed
deep remorse and sadness that they had missed out on so much
of his life. I didn’t feel that sadness because I had not—my
brother and I were very close and loved each other’s company
immensely. Henry was my hero.
224

HENRY ▪ 225

The reason I had this relationship with Henry while others
in our family did not is not because I am a better person; I am no
saint. The reason is that after he first became ill, I was somehow
able to mourn who he had been before, while most of my brothers
and sisters (there are nine of us) seemed unable to.
At first, I know we all felt it—it was impossible to accept
that he was no longer there in the way he had been. Handsome,
kind, and loving with a magical sense of humor, he would never
become the person we all had envisioned he would—a loving
husband and father, a responsible caregiver and successful man.
When he became ill with schizophrenia, we all longed for
the “old Henry” and made little room in our hearts for the “new
Henry.” He had the same problem.
For the first five years of his illness he, like us, was stuck on
the plan he had had for the future, and he became depressed that
what he had planned now seemed impossible to attain. Prior to
becoming ill, he had always worked, gone to university and had
girlfriends. That was over now. Not until he had mourned his old
vision for the future did he discover that the core of the old Henry
was still there and realize that new plans needed to be made.
The last year of his life he was especially happy. This is not
some wishful revisionist delusion on my part—it is confirmed by
all that were close to him. He had many friends; he worked odd
jobs with his friend “Pops,” and his girlfriend Mary had become
a big part of his life.
Mourning when mental illness strikes
The research is clear on the importance of mourning. By
mourning what has been lost, you open your eyes to all that
is still there. Moreover, you open your eyes and heart to new
possibilities.
In a review of the research on literature we published in the
spring of 2007 in the Annals of General Psychiatry, my colleagues

226 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!

and I found that people with schizophrenia who had successfully
mourned were less likely to feel suicidal. Studies of family
members of people with schizophrenia have found that those
relatives that who have mourned the loss of the way things used
to be are less likely to be critical of their mentally ill loved ones,
and feel less burdened and stressed.
Some research findings are intuitive—they just make sense.
This is one of those instances. I saw that same transformation in
my brother and experienced the improvement in his hopefulness
about his future and our relationship. I’ve seen it repeated time
and again in the patients and families I have worked with this last
25 years.
Closing one door opens another
It is like any other major change in life. When you mourn, you
feel sad because you are saying goodbye to what was and what
you hoped would be. But by doing this, you feel at peace—and
even happy—as you say hello to what is and what can be. I have
counseled many families and also consumers on the importance
of going through this process. Families that successfully mourn
are able to let go of their anger at their loved ones. They learn
to separate the illness from the person. Communication gets
healthier, and even the course of illness can improve because of
the lessened tensions between family members.
But I never before experienced the stark truth of this wisdom
so completely as I did when my brother died. Now that he is
gone, I find I have no regrets.
I cherish countless good memories of him. I remember
our nearly constant laughter together, his helping me build an
outdoor fireplace in my home which crackled with flame and
heat for my family earlier this evening, his giving me permission
to write about him, the pride he felt in me and I in him, and so
much more.

HENRY ▪ 227

I recall our many conversations, how often he would ramble
and it would be hard for me to listen. Despite all, he would always
end by saying, “You’re my baby brother, and I love you.”
After Henry became ill, many things changed. But not the
fact that he was smart, handsome, kind, and loving. Or how
he could make me laugh—splitting-your-gut laughter—in any
situation, even at our mother’s funeral! He usually did it with
kindness and reverence for the feelings of other people—except
for those rare instances later in life when the illness got the best of
him. Because he felt less inhibited, he was far funnier than he was
prior to becoming ill and he knew it.
Many people have written to me to offer their condolences,
to share their good memories of Henry, and to wisely say how
lucky I was to have him as my older brother. They are right.
But they left out one vital thing, a lesson I learned anew
as I reflected on the seemingly insurmountable task of saying
goodbye to him all over again. I was especially fortunate that I
was able to mourn after he first became ill—to say goodbye to
what I had hoped for—so that during these past 25 years, I could
laugh with him, make new good memories with him, and realize
just how lucky I was to be his “baby brother.”
Henry worked with me to get well and our relationship was
a good one. He helped many people through his example, his
influence on my thinking, and his willingness to let his story be
told in my books and articles. We will never know how many
lives he saved and how many people with poor insight he helped
to recover.
I have received many letters from kind souls telling me he
had that impact—I am sure there are many more who have not
written.
I have much to be grateful for.

232 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!
Amador XF, Strauss DH, Yale SA & Gorman JM. Awareness of Illness in
Schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 17:113-132, 1991.
Bartko G, Herczog I & Zador G. Clinical symptomatology and drug
compliance in schizophrenic patients. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 77:
74-76. 1988.
McEvoy JP, Applebaum PS, Geller JL, Freter S. Why must some
schizophrenic patients be involuntarily committed? The role of insight.
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 30: 13-17. 1989.
Caracci G, Mukherjee S, Roth S & Decina P. Subjective Awareness of
Abnormal Involuntary Movements in Chronic Schizophrenic Patients.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 147: 295-298. 1990.
Cuesta MJ & Peralta V. Lack of Insight in Schizophrenia. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 20:359-366. 1994.
Flashman LA, McAllister TW, Saykin AJ, Johnson SC, Rick JH, Green RL.
Neuroanatomical Correlates of Unawareness of Illness in Schizophrenia.
From the Neuropsychology & Brain Imaging Laboratories, Dept. of
Psychiatry, Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, NH & New Hampshire
Hospital, Concord, NH 03301. Presented at the Biennial Meeting of the
International Congress on Schizophrenia Research, Santa Fe, New Mexico,
April 20, 1999
Ghaemi NS & Pope HG, Jr. Lack of Insight in Psychotic and Affective
Disorders: A Review of Empirical Studies. Harvard Review of Psychiatry,
May/June: 22-33. 1994.
Greenfield D, Strauss JS, Bowers MB & Mandelkern M. Insight and
Interpretation of Illness in Recovery from Psychosis. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 15: 245-252. 1989.

LITERATURE CITED ▪ 233
Heinrichs DW, Cohen BP & Carpenter WT, Jr. Early Insight and the
Management of Schizophrenic Decompensation. Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 173: 133-138. 1985.
Kampman O, Lehtinen K. Compliance in psychoses. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica. 100(3): 167-75, 1999.
Lysaker PH, Bell MD, Milstein R, Bryson G & Beam-Goulet J. Insight
and Psychosocial Treatment Compliance in Schizophrenia. Psychiatry,
Vol. 57, 1994.
Lysaker PH, Bell MD, Bryson G & Kaplan E. Neurocognitive function and
insight in schizophrenia: support for an association with impairments in
executive function but not with impairments in global function. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica. 97(4): 297-301, 1998.
McEvoy JP, Appelbaum PS, Geller JL & Freter S. Why Must Some
Schizophrenic Patients be Involuntarily Committed? The Role of Insight.
Comprehensive Psychiatry 30: 13-17, 1989.
McEvoy JP, Apperson LJ, Applebaum PS, Ortlip P, Brecosky J & Hammill K. Insight in schizophrenia: Its relationship to acute psychopathology.Journal of Nervous and Mental Disorders, 177: 43-47, 1989.
McGlashan TH, Levy ST & Carpenter WT, Jr. Integration and Sealing
Over: Clinically Distinct Recovery Styles from Schizophrenia. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 32: 1269-1272, 1975.
McGlashan TH & Carpenter WT, Jr. Does attitude toward psychosis
relate to outcome? American Journal of Psychiatry, 138: 797-801, 1981.

234 ▪ I AM NOT SICK—I DON’T NEED HELP!
Michalakeas A, Skoutas C, Charalambous A, Peristeris A, Marinos
V, Keramari E & Theologou A. Insight in Schizophrenia and Mood
Disorders and its Relation to Psychopathology. Acta Psychiatrica
Scandinavica, 90: 46-49, 1994.
Mohamed S, Fleming S, Penn DL & Spaulding W. Insight in schizophrenia: its relationship to measures of executive functions. Journal of Nervous & Mental Disease. 187(9): 525-31, 1999.
Morgan KD, Vearnals S, Hutchinson G, Orr KGD, Greenwood K,
Sharpley R, Mallet R, Morris R, David A, Leff J & Murray RM. Insight,
ethnicity, and neuropsychology in first-onset psychosis. Schizophrenia
Research, 36(1-3): 144-145, 1999.
Smith TE, Hull JW & Santos L. The relationship between symptoms
and insight in schizophrenia: a longitudinal perspective. Schizophrenia
Research. 33(1-2): 63-7, 1998.
Swanson C, Jr., Freudenreich O, McEvoy JP, Nelson L, Kamaraju L &
Wilson WH. Insight in Schizophrenia and Mania.The Journal of Nervous
and Mental Disease, 183: 752-755, 1995.
Takai A, Uematsu M, Ueki H, Sone K & Kaiya Hisanobu. Insight and
its Related Factors in Chronic Schizophrenic Patients: A preliminary
Study. European Journal of Psychiatry, 6: 159-170, 1992.
Voruganti LN, Heslegrave RJ & Awad AG. Neurocognitive correlates
of positive and negative syndromes inschizophrenia. Canadian Journal of
Psychiatry. 42(10): 1066-71, 1997.
Wciorka J. A Clinical Typology of Schizophrenic Patients: Attitudes
towards their Illness. Psychopathology, 21: 259-266, 1988.

LITERATURE CITED ▪ 235
Wilson WH, Ban T & Guy W. Flexible System Criteria in Chronic
Schizophrenia. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 27: 259-265. 1986.
World Health Organization, Report of the International Pilot Study of
Schizophrenia. Geneva: World Health Organization Press. 1973.
Young et al. Medication adherence failure in schizophrenia: a forensic
review of rates, reasons, treatments, and prospects. Journal of the
American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, 27(3): 426-44, 1999.
Young DA, Davila R, Scher H. Unawareness of illness and neuropsychological performance in chronic schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research,
10: 117-124. 1993.
Young DA, Zakzanis KK, Baily C, Davila R, Griese J, Sartory G & Thom
A. Further Parameters of Insight and Neuropsychological Deficit in
Schizophrenia and Other Chronic Mental Disease. Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 186: 44-50. 1998.

LEAP®

QUICK START GUIDE

LISTEN
Reflectively
to:

Delusions
Anosognosia
Desires
Repeat back what you’ve heard without comment, defensiveness or
contradiction. We resist reflecting back many important things our
patients tell us because:
•
•
•

We fear it will make it worse (i.e., delusions, insight, attitudes, medication, etc.)
We do not want to be asked to do something we cannot.
We worry about injuring the therapeutic alliance.

Delay giving your opinion:
“I promise I will answer your question. If it’s alright with you, I would like to first hear
more about _______. Okay?”
“I will tell you what I think. I would like to keep listening to your views on this because
I am learning a lot I didn’t know. Can I tell you later what I think?”
“I will tell you. But I believe your opinion is more important than mine and I would like
to learn more before I tell you my opinion. Would that be okay?”

When you finally give your opinion, use the “three A’s”:
APOLOGIZE: “I want to apologize because my views might feel hurtful or
disappointing.”
ACKNOWLEDGE FALLIBILITY: “Also, I could be wrong. I don’t know everything.”
AGREE: “I hope that we can just agree to disagree. I respect your point of view and I
hope you can respect mine.”

LEAP®

QUICK START GUIDE

EMPATHIZE
Strategically

express empathy for:
Delusional beliefs
His desire to prove he is not sick
His wish to avoid treatment

Normalize the experience.

AGREE
•
•
•

Discuss only perceived problems/symptoms
Review advantages and disadvantages of treatment
Reflect back and highlight the perceived benefits

Agree to disagree.

PARTNER
Move forward on goals you both agree
can be worked on together.

About the Author
Dr. Amador is an internationally sought-after speaker,
clinical psychologist, professor at Columbia University, Teachers
College, in New York City, the Director of the LEAP Institute
and author of eight books.
In 2010, Dr. Amador and his LEAP program were featured
in the PBS’s NOVA series, This Emotional Life. Dr. Amador’s
expertise has made him a regular contributor to the Today Show
and a featured guest on ABC’s Good Morning America, Prime
Time Live, CBS This Morning, NBC Nightly News, 60 Minutes,
CNN, Dateline, ABC’s World News Tonight, Fox News, The New
York Times, The Wall Street Journal, USA Today and many others.
Dr. Amador has been a consultant to numerous companies
and government agencies including the National Institute of
Health.
His forensic cases include: the Unabomber, PFC Lynndie
England, the Elizabeth Smart kidnapping, and the trials of
Zacarias Moussaoui and accused 9/11 co-conspirator Ramsi bin
al Shibh. Dr. Amador has over 25 years experience working with
adults, families, and couples. He lives in New York.
Previously, Dr. Amador was a professor in the Department
of Psychiatry at Columbia University, College of Physicians &
Surgeons; on the Board of Directors of the National Alliance
for the Mentally Ill (NAMI); Director of Research at NAMI; and
the Director of Psychology at the New York State Psychiatric
Institute.
Dr. Amador has published over 100 peer-reviewed scientific
papers, and many other publications that have been translated
into more than 20 languages.
Dr. Amador was co-chair of the last text revision of the
Schizophrenia and related disorders section of the DSM IV-TR
(often referred to as the “Psychiatrists’ Bible”).
253

LEAP® (Listen-Empathize-Agree-Partner®) shows clinicians, family
members, and law enforcement professionals how to quickly gain the trust
of someone who is angry or paranoid. It gives you the tools you need to
persuade someone in “denial” about mental illness to accept treatment and/or
voluntarily comply with your requests. It grew out of Dr. Xavier Amador’s:
•

Successful struggle to convince his brother Henry, who was diagnosed
with schizophrenia, to take the medications prescribed for him.

•

Twenty-five years of hands-on clinical experience with patients who
lacked insight.

•

Experience gained from hundreds of LEAP seminars involving tens of
thousands of clinicians, family members, and law enforcement.

•

Twenty-five years of clinical research supported by the NIMH, Stanley
Research Foundation, American Psychiatric Association and NARSAD.

Since the book I Am Not Sick, I Don’t Need Help! was published, thousands
have learned LEAP from the author and LEAP Institute faculty worldwide.

For more information, please visit

www.LEAPInstitute.org

